Ms. Ref. No.: CNSNS-D-11-00259
Title:      Reduction of continuous symmetries of chaotic flows
            by the method of slices
Authors:    Stefan Froehlich and P Cvitanovi\'c

                                        received 2011-05-13

Reviewer #1: In the manuscript "Reduction of continuous
symmetries of chaotic flows by the method of slices", the
authors study the feasibility of continuous symmetry reduction
by the method of slices. As a concrete example, they consider
the complex Lorenz system.

One flaw of the method is the existence of the inflexion
hyperplane which causes discontinuities in the reduced
dynamics. This difficulty was already pointed out in E. Siminos
and P. Cvitanovic, Physica D, 240, 187 (2011), for the same
dynamical system.

Compared to the above article, the present manuscript shows
that such a discontinuity is extremely unlikely for a generic
trajectory. On the contrary, it is more likely to experience
fast variations as the orbit approaches the inflexion
hyperplane, which has to be handled numerically. Finally, as a
cure to this issue, the authors propose to use a set of charts,
such that the inflexion hyperplane issue is actually never
encountered.

The present manuscript is technical as reduction of continuous
symmetry is not a straightforward task. The manuscript presents
globally clearly the method and the difficulties raised by the
inflexion hyperplane. I find the results interesting as it
enables one to reduce the effective dimension of the problem to
analyze. I recommend the following modifications to the
manuscript.

1. Coefficients are missing in the equation before equation
  (6), equations (12), (16) and (17). I do understand that
  since the equations are equal to zero, technically such
  coefficients can be removed. However it is misleading, please
  correct the equations.

2. Page 5: The quotient space M/G is not a hyperplane,
  neither it is isomorphic to a hyperplane. As it is stated in
  the manuscript, the group orbit generally intersects more
  than once the representation hyperplane and additional
  criteria has to be used to pick up a unique solution. This
  point has to be clarified.

3. I agree with equation (8), which means that there a minus
  sign missing in the previous equation (sentence right before
  the equation). Please correct.

4. Equation (11) does not appear to be correct. Besides, even
  corrected, the derivation of the equation is not
  straightforward. Some explanation should be considered to
  guide the reader.

5. Top of page 9: Inflexion points are not extrema but
  critical points. Please correct.

6. I agree that the angular velocity diverges when a
  trajectory passes through the inflexion hyperplane. However,
  except at the exact instant of the discontinuity, the
  velocity is continuous. As a result, I do not get how it
  induces a Dirac discontinuity, as shown in figure 3. The same
  question could happen to other readers, so please clarify.

7. Part 4: The charting method is sound and promising in its
  general idea. However, its actual feasibility is not
  demonstrated in the manuscript. In particular a figure
  showing the result of such a reduction would be a strong
  proof of its feasibility.

8. Page 20: In the sentence after equation (A.6), the
  invariant point condition is either
  Tx=0 or T_a x=0 for a=1, 2, . N.
  Please clarify.

9. Page 20: A reference should be added to the reducibility
  of compact groups.

Minor corrections
10. Figure 1 has no color, contrary to what is indicated in
  the caption, which makes the figure more difficult to read.
  In particular, if black and white, the generic segment TW1
  (and E1) should be pointed out in the figure.

11. Generic symmetries are defined in equation (3). However,
  the symmetry group G (SO(2) in the example) is not defined
  there which might be confusing for the reader. Please
  clarify.

12. Page 9: In the sentence after equation (12), the word
  "the" is repeated.

13. Page 9: The final equation is v=u+g^-1 d_t g Id.

14. Page 11, in the sentence before equation (17), the
  numbering (1) and (2) of two conditions is confusing with
  equation labels.

15. Figure 4, left panel: For black and white printing, the
  difference between the two orbits is not obvious. A
  modification of the figure would be worthwhile.

16. Page 21: Before equation (B.1), the reference equation
  for angular velocities should be (14) instead of (6).
