                                   Referee’s report on revised version:
   ‘On state space geometry of the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky ﬂow in a periodic domain’
                 by Predrag Cvitanovi´, Ruslan L. Davidchak and Evangelos Siminos
                                        c
                               resubmitted to SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Syst.
     The manuscript under review is a careful and detailed attempt to understand the dynamics and
geometry of state space of a model chaotic partial diﬀerential equation, the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky
(KS) equation. Unlike in most previous related studies which were restricted to odd solutions,
the authors consider general periodic solutions and tackle the additional challenges introduced by
continuous symmetry, especially the considerable increase in the diversity of allowed solutions.
     The goal is to understand the dynamics of a particular (ﬁxed L) KS system via extensive
computation of its equilibria, relative equilibria, periodic and relative periodic orbits, and the
heteroclinic connections between these; these computed solutions, though unstable, form (in the
authors’ words) a ‘cage’ for the full state space geometry. The domain size chosen, L = 22, which
lies in the interval of smallest L-values for which the PDE displays chaotic behavior, is such that the
chaos is still fairly low-dimensional, and does not yet display all the features of full spatiotemporal
(extensive) chaos observed in larger domains (there is only one positive Lyapunov exponent); but
as the study makes clear, the phase space is already quite complicated, with in particular a large
number of relative periodic and pre-periodic orbits even of relatively low period (T < 200). The
authors’ hope and goal is to extend these geometric ideas to larger domains, and ultimately to fully
spatiotemporally chaotic or turbulent regimes; this study makes progress in this direction but also
gives an indication of the high complexity that might be expected. . .
     I am pleased that the authors found my comments on the ﬁrst version of this manuscript helpful;
and I thank them for their very careful and detailed, point-by-point responses and explanations. I
enjoyed reading the replies, and generally agree with their comments; and feel that the changes made
have improved and clariﬁed the manuscript, especially in the discussions of symmetries, visualiza-
tion, and the extended Appendix C. I prefer the modiﬁed title (maybe: “On the state space. . . ”),
while the discussion of the use of the terms “chaos”, “spatiotemporal chaos” and “turbulence”
in the Introduction clariﬁes the authors’ perspective on this tricky issue. (I also appreciated the
blue-colored text, which made the modiﬁcations to the text much easier to identify!)
     As the authors make clear in their response, the story is by no means yet complete, even for
the L = 22 KS equation; they indicate that further details including more material on the relative
periodic orbits and symmetry reduction will appear in a forthcoming paper, which I look forward
to seeing.
However, the present work is, I feel, already a signiﬁcant contribution to the understanding of the
state space geometry of a high-dimensional system, and I am happy to recommend publication in
the SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems.
                                  ————————————————
     I have included some minor comments, suggestions and corrections that the authors might wish
to consider (I do not need to see the manuscript again):
• There is some inconsistency in usage and abbreviations. For instance, on Page 1, the same
        expression is written as (line 7 ) “∞-d”, (lines 17–18 ) “inﬁnite dimensional” and (line 20 )
        “∞-dimensional” (similarly on other pages).
        For consistency with “low-dimensional” and “ﬁnite-dimensional”, instead of one of the above
        three choices I would suggest using “inﬁnite-dimensional.”
[x] Fixed 
                                                     
• Page 2, 3rd paragraph, line 2: “its non-wandering set” 
[x] Fixed
  Also, this sentence, the ﬁrst sentence of the 3rd paragraph of page 2, seems to overlap with
  the (newly added) last paragraph of page 1.
[]
• Page 2, line −6: “. . . inspired by the investigation of Vanessa L´pez et al. [38] of . . . ”
[x] Fixed                                                                        o
• Page 4, below (2.3): “. . . replace the sum by an m > 0 sum.” (?)
[x] Fixed
• Page 7, below (2.19): The periods of spatially periodic equilibria are surely L/n for integer
  n, not multiples of L?
[]                                               ˜
• Page 8, line 13: Surely not all |k| > L short wavelength perturbations are strongly con-
  tractive? (I would expect that, for instance, the mode with k = L + 1 is only weakly
  contractive.)
[]
• Pages 9 and 21: Sections 3 and 8 have the same heading, “Energy transfer rates” — might
  one of these be changed?
[]
• Page 10, line below (3.2): What is meant by “. . . evaluated on q equilibrium . . . ”? Could
  this be “. . . evaluated on an equilibrium or relative equilibrium labelled by q”?
[]
• Page 11: In equations (3.8) and (3.9), I think one would write u2 and u2 (rather than “ ux 2 ”
                                                                       x      xx
  and “ uxx 2 ”).
[x] Fixed by Vaggelis (do you agree?).                                                                  ¯
• Page 11, below (3.9): “The time-averaged energy density E computed on a typical orbit is a
  constant” (? — of course the computed value “goes to” a constant; but the theoretical time
  average assumes inﬁnite time).
[]
• Page 11, below (3.10): Which part of Figure 8.1 is intended; should this be “. . . fall onto the
  diagonal in Figure 8.1(a), and so do . . . ”?
  It is clear that the equilibria, relative equilibria, and averages on the (relative) periodic orbits
  should fall on the D-P diagonal, but not clear to me how E might be related (see Figure
  8.1(b)); and indeed, while they are close, the averages do not fall on a straight line in Figure
  8.1(b).
• Page 11, 2 lines above Section 4: “Michelson”
[x] Fixed
• Page 11, last line: “attracting periodic states” (not attractive?!)
[x] Fixed
• Page 12, 2nd paragraph: In the light of the discussion of the low-dimensionality of the KS
  dynamics, and the discussion, based on a computation of the leading Lyapunov exponents,
  that the chaos is mainly conﬁned to a four-dimensional manifold, the following recently pub-
  lished paper (which also uses the KS equation as an example) may be relevant or of interest:
  H.-l. Yang, K.A. Takeuchi, F. Ginelli, H. Chat´ and G. Radons, “Hyperbolicity and the ef-
  fective dimension of spatially extended dissipative systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 074102
  (20 February 2009).
[]
• Page 12, lines −6,7,8: Suggestion: “E2 and E3 essentially lie in the 2nd and 3rd Fourier
  component complex plane, with small deformations of the k = 2j and k = 3j harmonics,
  respectively.” (?)
[]
• Page 13, last paragraph, and Table 5.2: The ﬁrst sentence is not quite accurate, as for the
  relative equilibria TW±1 and TW±2 , only E is given in Table 5.2. (Can the quantities T , Λe
  and Λc be computed for the relative equilibria?)
  Similarly: Thank you for the explanation of how T was computed for E3 . The use of the
  characteristic decay time scale makes sense to me, but the description on page 13 implies that
  for all equilibria (and relative equilibria), T is computed as T = 2π/νe . Could this description
  be clariﬁed?
[]
• Page 14, below (5.1): “. . . where δ takes a set of values . . . ”
[]
• Page 15, (5.2) and the line below: The notation v1 and v2 for orthonormal vectors seems
  unfortunate, since (i) elsewhere, such as in (5.1), vectors have been denoted in boldface,
  speciﬁcally as e(j) ; while (ii) in Figures 5.4-5.6 and 5.8, the notation v1 and v2 (and v3 ) is
  used for the scalar coordinate axes (that is, the projections onto the three chosen orthonormal
  vectors). I suggest using boldface vectors also in (5.2).
[]
• Page 17, line 4: Should this read “We adapt their arguments . . . ”?
[]
• Page 18, Fig. 5.7: In Fig. 5.7(a), are the axes the same as in Fig. 5.6(a), just rotated?
  What are the axes used in the representation of Fig. 5.6(b)?
[]
• Page 18 and Fig. 5.9: I was unable to ﬁnd a reference (at least in Section 5) to Figure 5.9. In
  the author responses, this ﬁgure is described as a “global picture that links all these together
  — a cage that organizes the dynamics”, and I agree; so might it be useful to include a
  brief description such as this, say at the end of Section 5, to introduce Fig. 5.9 and highlight
  its signiﬁcance?
[]
• Page 19, caption of Fig. 5.9: What exactly is meant by the vectors E2 −τ1/4 E2 and E3 −τ1/2 E3 :
  just subtraction? (This is surprising mainly for being unlike any other projections performed
  in the manuscript, and is not discussed or motivated, especially the presence of τ1/2 E3 .)
  “. . . E3 equilibrium to τ1/4 E2 . . . ”
  “. . . have been omitted for clarity.”
[]
• Page 21, Fig. 8.2: It is rather tricky to identify the locations of the equilibria, especially of
  E2 , in these ﬁgures; could they be labelled explicitly as in Fig. 8.1?
  Also, there doesn’t seem to be any discussion of Fig. 8.2 and its signiﬁcance in the text (only
  a comment that such a projection can be misleading).
[]
• Pages 21–22, Section 8 and Figures 8.1–8.3: Is it appropriate (in the light of the discussion
  regarding terminology and the changes made elsewhere in the manuscript) to refer to the
  L = 22 chaotic trajectories as ‘turbulent’ in this section and these ﬁgures? (I appreciate the
  authors’ reasons for wishing to retain some use of the term ‘turbulence’ in the light of the
  goal of their overall research.)
[]
• Page 24, below (A.3): xn = n · 2π L/N    ˜
[]
• Page 27, below (C.5): in “. . . evaluated using equation for the vector ﬁeld”: which equation
is meant (reference); or should it read “. . . the equation . . . ”?
[]
• Page 29, Ref. [3]: The reference for the paper by Bronski and Gambill is: Nonlinearity, 19
(2006), pp. 2023–2039. (Also: “and L2 bounds . . . ” in the title.)
[]
• Page 30, Ref. [28]: “. . . for the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation”
[]
• Page 30, Ref. [42]: The ﬁrst author is R. E. LaQuey.
[]
    While overall the article is well-written, it would be improved by some careful proof-reading to
take care of several minor errors of grammar or English usage; in particular, the deﬁnite article
“the” is often missing when needed (and sometimes present when not needed. . . ). I have not
attempted to point out most of these language aspects in the list above.

