
John R Elton
Research Proposal 2008


In Fall 2008 I propose to continue my research project at the Center for 
Nonlinear Science, School of Physics of the Georgia Institute of 
Technology. This work is a continuation of research which began during 
my time as an undergraduate student at Georgia Tech, under supervision 
of Predrag Cvitanovic (Professor) and John Gibson (Senior Research 
Scientist). 

We study turbulent mixing in plane Couette flow, a problem of great 
interest both from a theoretical point of view as well as for its wide 
ranging applicability to engineering and industry. Plane Couette flow 
refers to the motion of a fluid created by the shearing of two 
oppositely moving parallel planes. In the past year our group has made 
significant progress in understanding detailed geometry of state-space 
of this flow, none of which known as recently as three years ago.

Our group-theoretic analysis of the symmetries of the plane Couette flow 
has led to a deeper understanding of the nature of the recently 
discovered exact solutions of the Navier Stokes equations. We plan to 
build upon these insights and analyze fluid mixing and chaotic scalar 
fields advection, by studying Lagrangian tracer particles. Specifically, 
we study the way in which invariant surfaces within these exact 
solutions, which provide a boundary for all tracer particles, define the 
regions within the fluid where the most efficient mixing occurs. Initial 
progress towards this goal has been achieved in our recent work, with 
the discovery of stagnation points of the equilibrium solutions of 
Navier-Stokes, points within the fluid for which no motion occurs due to 
symmetry considerations. 

Applying this kind of analysis to the recently discovered sets of plane 
Couette unstable periodic solutions  should lead to a novel description 
and understanding of the ways in which mixing may occur within turbulent 
shear flows. We envision applications of this description of 
3-dimensional, full Navier-Stokes with no modeling assumptions, 
turbulent mixing to important problems ranging from heat transport, to 
chemical mixing in the pharmaceutical industry, to geophysical studies 
of wind-driven ocean streamlines.

For the overall description of this research, see the NSF grant summary:
http://www.researchcrossroads.org/index.php?view=article&id=50%3Agrant-details&option=com_content&Itemid=64&grant_id=3792104

