The following comments address the points in the Knowledge, Skills & Experience section of the job profile, following the same numbering scheme. 

1. I obtained a degree in Physics from the University of Thessaloniki, with grade 8.17/10.
2. I obtained a MSc and PhD in Physics from the Georgia Institute of Technology (not graded).
3. I have been employed as a Teaching Assistant for five years during my MSc and PhD studies, as detailed in the work experience section.
4. I have published 8 journal articles in international, peer-reviewed journals.
5. I work as a postdoctoral fellow at the Max-Planck Inst. for the Physics of Complex Systems, carrying out research within the Nonlinear and Relativistic Optics group, as well as with external collaborators.
6. My publication record indicates an ability to both contribute new ideas in the area of applied dynamical systems (items [1] and [2] in my publication list) and to utilise ideas from dynamical systems' theory to tackle problems in physics (items [6]-[8] in my publication list).
7. My work typically involves computations and editing in digital formats. As a result, I am comfortable with IT systems and the major operating systems.
8. After a PhD which focused in the dynamical systems approach to turbulence, my interest has shifted towards the area of extreme intensity laser-matter interactions. Within this field I've kept a dynamical system's perspective, presenting a unique and identifiable research profile.
9. I maintain collaborations with previous groups I've worked with, while initiating new collaborations. In handling the research effort across multiple projects, prioritising different demands has been essential.
10. The length of the acknowledgements section in item [2] of my publication list, provides an indication of how much I value feedback from colleagues.
11. Part of my responsibilities as a member of Prof. Cvitanovic group was to participate actively in writing grant applications.
12. As a person who has changed fields, presenting ideas to non-specialists has been an essential skill I acquired. This has influenced both my oral presentation style and my scientific writing. As an example, my papers are typically written with both the theoretical physicist and the applied mathematician in mind (see for example [2] and [7] in my publication list).
13. In the final year of my PhD studies I gave a series of three lectures for the advanced postgraduate course Nonlinear Dynamics in the School of Physics, on the topic of Symmetry in Dynamical Systems, to a mixed audience of Physics and Mathematics department MSc and PhD students. Through my studies and research I have acquired sufficient expertise to teach a range of subjects in applied mathematics (e.g. complex systems, nonlinear dynamics, computational mathematics) or introductory courses. I have voluntarily assumed teaching responsibilities, both as an undergraduate student (as lab assistant and grader) and as a PhD student (substitute lecturing). The reason I seek employment in a University rather than a research institute is that I consider teaching an essential and rewarding part of academic responsibilities.
14. Since my research during the first five years of my postgraduate studies was funded by a teaching assistantship, I quickly acquired the skill of effectively splitting my time between research and teaching. During the last year of my PhD studies I've organised and managed the informal seminar of the Center for Nonlinear Science, while finishing my thesis and applying for postdoctoral positions.
15. Approaching people outside the community of my PhD research and being able to publish in different fields, highlights my ability to communicate effectively.
16. I've been involved voluntarily both in teaching (see point 13) and administration of a research seminar (see point 14) and I have secured funding for most of my MSc and PhD studies through a teaching assistantship.
17. Flexibility and co-operative spirit in my relations to colleagues can be illustrated by a number of publications which are the result of collaboration in topics which were not directly assigned to me (items [3]-[5], [6], [8] in my publication list).
18. Having worked in three countries, I had to comply with requirements of diverse work environments, different duties and responsibilities towards colleagues. I think that my successful route up to this point clearly indicates professionalism.
19. I've survived several examinations of the north-American system, which always include an element of pressure (GRE, qualifying exams, thesis defence). Moreover, I was successful in several interviews for post-doctoral appointments.
20. I consider teaching undergraduate courses especially rewarding, as it permits a creative approach; teaching postgraduate courses contributes to ones own advancement, as these are closer to the research level.
21. I could be available in short notice, but a three months notice would be preferable.