Chaos: MS #12259CAT
"Cartography of high-dimensional flows:
 A visual guide to sections and slices"

Response to Reviewer #1
The review is reproduced in full with author responses listed in
parenthetical comments.

The English is satisfactory, although I find the informal style a bit
annoying at times. (For instance, on page 5, "Suppose your day job is
computing invariant solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations.")

{\it This contribution had originated in a series of lectures, and the
submission that Reviewers have received indeed suffers from annoying
excess of informality. The coauthors have since toned most of that down,
so `your day job' is now `????.'}

Critical technical points:

1. p2, "a better norm might be a distance between digitized images."
 Would such a norm satisfy the parallelogram law, and thus have an
 associated inner product? Does the chosen norm need to be induced from
 an inner product? I would think that it does, since orthogonality is
 used later (e.g., eq (2)).

2. p5, just before eq (7): It is claimed that <x' | Tx> vanishes
 because T is anti-symmetric. However, while this is true for SO(n) (the
 group mainly considered here), it is not true in general. For instance,
 it is not true for SE(2) as used in ref 4, or for scaling groups as used
 in ref 39. I believe the slice condition (7) should actually be an
 affine space, defined by the displayed equation before (7), although it
 does simplify to (7) in some special cases.

Minor points:

1. p1, "it is possible to take a stroll through 61,506 dimensional
 state space..." Where does this number come from? Later (p3), other
 numbers are mentioned, such as a 61,504-dimensional section borer of a
 61,505-dimensional slab, but no actual example seems to be considered
 with these dimensions, and it is not clear to me what system these
 numbers are referring to.

2. p1, "In quantum mechanics calculations, one always starts out by
 ... block-diagonal ..." Is symmetry reduction really the same thing as
 diagonalization? I don't see how. Is the point simply that one wants to
 choose coordinates that are appropriate for the problem?

3. Several times it is mentioned that "turbulence breaks all
 symmetries", and I do not understand what precisely this means. Is the
 point that, even though the equations may be equivariant, the specific
 solutions may not possess these same symmetries? This is of course true,
 but I am not familiar with the authors' terminology.

4. Fig 1: It looks like the group orbit in (d) is a circle
 (1-dimensional), while in (c) it looks 3-dimensional. This should be
 made consistent.

5. Figure 5(a): I do not understand this diagram, and I wonder if
 something has been left out of the figure. Is a point here supposed to
 represent a group orbit? The only difference I see between (a) and (c)
 is that the dashed portion of the curve has been made solid. It would be
 good to denote the group orbit some other way, so that it is clearer
 what is going on.

6. p9, I don't understand the difference between the "method of
 co-moving frames" and the "method of connections" (Fig 12). Are they the
 same? If I am understanding Fig 12 correctly, it looks like since there
 is no motion along the group tangent directions, this should be the same
 as having a co-moving frame.


[ THE REST IS THE TEXT FROM ANOTHER RESPONSE, RECYCLE BITS OF IT! }


{\it done}

p. 10, l. 3 "which increases with y" could be rephrased

{\it done}

p. 11, last paragraph, why are cusps so undesirable in
a state space representation if they are just a by-product
of the chosen projection?

{\it there is a fuller explanation on p. 12 in the paragraph
that begins with "Instead ..."}

p. 16, l.1, "manifolds" should be singular

{\it done}

Reference to Halcrow et. al. (2008), indicate the arXiv number

{\it done}

---------------------------------------------------------------------
siminos/atlas/reviews/response1.1.txt
$Author$ $Date$
