Dear Prof. McKenna,

I am writting to apply for the postdoctoral position in your group (Reference No JA/R20/2013). I received my PhD in Physics in 2009 from the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, USA, working on non-linear dynamics of fluid turbulence. I am currently working as a postdoctoral fellow and deputy head of the "Computational Nonlinear and Relativistic Optics Group" in the Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems (MPIPKS) in Dresden, Germany. My current research is mostly focused on the study of laser-driven ion acceleration, through a combination of PIC simulations and nonlinear dynamics tools.

During my PhD studies I've used tools of dynamical system theory to gain an understanding of simple models of fluid turbulence. In particular, I've worked on developing methods to uncover geometrical structure in phase space of turbulent flows, in order to gain deeper insight on results of numerical simulations.

As a postdoctoral fellow at CEA in Arpajon, France (in Paris area) I've chosen to enter the field of laser-plasma interactions as it offers opportunities to study nonlinear phenomena at extreme conditions.  My research focused on the issue of stability of nonlinear electron plasma waves and its relation to the saturation of parametric instabilities in the context of inertial confinement fusion. This allowed me to become familiar with plasma kinetic theory, to use Vlasov solvers and to develope my own (semi-)numerical tools for the study of kinetic instabilities. At the same time I became acquanted with relativistic intensity laser-plasma interactions through a study of solitary waves in cold fluid-Maxwell models of plasmas.

The latter experience motivated me to concentrate on the relativistic regime which I find it the most interesting as it explores the intensity frontier of modern laser systems. As a postdoctoral fellow at the MPIPKS in Dresden, I've participated in the developement of a 1D PIC code in order to study the onset of self-induced transparency in the interaction of circularly polarized laser pulses with overdense targets. Our study revealed the importance of kinetic effects such as electron heating, while a dynamical systems study allowed the interpetation of PIC simulations. Currently I am studying the effect of self-induced transparency and transverse instabilities on radiation pressure acceleration of ions using 2D PIC simulations with the code EPOCH. Recently I also got the opportunity to be involved in a collabolarotion with experimentalists at the Helmholtz Instutute in Jena (POLARIS laser), where my role is to run 2D and 3D simulations with EPOCH in order to interpret the results of a pump-probe experiment related to electron wakefield acceleration in the bubble regime.

This latter experience of working with experimentalists is something I really enjoy and I would like to pursue a more close connection with experiments for my future research. This is the reason I am applying for the advertised position in your group. I have the computational expertise both in developing and running PIC simulations in massively parallel enviroments, while I also have demonstrated the ability to interpret simulations of diverse physical phenomena. Moreover the interest in your group in ion acceleration fits well with my current interests. Moreover I have demonstrated the ability to work well within a group since many of my projects are in collabolarotion with other postdocs or PhD students, even in different institutes.