                                                    9 Jul, 26 Oct 2012
JFM-12-S-0339
Revealing the state space of turbulent pipe flow by symmetry reduction
A. P. Willis, P. Cvitanovic and M. Avila


Authors responses to Referee 1
==============================

( The comments are given in full with author responses listed in
  parenthetical comments. The reference list is at the bottom of this
  text. The text edits are colored blue in the referee version of the
  resubmitted article. )

(0) [...] The so-called slicing technique introduced here is stressed as
a crucial tool for future research in the field. It is important but the
corresponding section is probably too much emphasized compared to the
numerical findings. Also, the deliberate use of algebraic vocabulary
makes the reading sometimes indigest and is likely to draw the potential
JFM reader's attention away from this paper. [...]

(
  We are very aware of the problem of 'gruppenpest' jargon, and have
  labored hard to keep it to a minimum.  Please notice that no `Lie'
  is mentioned in this paper on consequences of continuous symmetries.
  We did this and much else (sparing the reader of isotropies, quotients,
  factors, normalizers, centralizers, stabilizers, orbitfold; group
  action being `free, faithful, proper, regular') in order to protect
  digestion.  On our opinion, the bare residue left is essential for
  reading any other work that relies on symmetry reduction.  If there
  remained particularly difficult statements, we would be grateful if
  you pointed them out and we would try to rewrite them more plainly.
)

1) The authors put too much emphasis on techniques which are indeed
original yet not so groundbreakingly new. Individual travelling waves
formerly found in pipe flow where identified in Wedin & Kerswell (2004)
by freezing the axial phase, which is not different from the slicing
technique.

I recommend to shorten the abstract section about the slicing
technique. At the moment it takes many pages to simply end up with a
carefully controlled and adaptive phase shift as a post-processing of a
DNS). The authors are welcome to keep the spirit of generality, but
should emphasize more on the pipe flow results.

(
   Although it ought not to be the case, we fear that the techniques
   are groundbreakingly new: symmetry reduction for turbulent
   trajectories is much harder than symmetry reduction for
   individual travelling waves. This message has not got across in
   the past, and downplaying 'slicing technique' would not be helpful.

   The technique used here is very different from that used by Wedin &
   Kerswell (2004), where the phase is a constant specific of each TW
   and parameter values (Re, alpha and m). In contrast, turbulent
   trajectories do not feature a constant phase but this varies
   strongly with time. The slicing technqiue provides this
   `time-dependent phase' and hence can reduce continuous symmetry of
   all invariant solutions simultaneously as well as turbulent
   trajectories.
)

The basis (e1,...,e_n) for the projection is certainly useful
but (I,D) diagrams already give a good picture of the state space
structure.

(
   The (e1,...,e_n) projection permits the differentiation of solutions
   which are relevant to the dynamics from those which are not,
   as the (I,D) projection enforces all equilibria to lie on the
   diagonal.  Figure 9a is a good example, which shows that only
   S2U, of all the TW states included in the study, might be relevant
   to the dynamics.  Contrast this with the (I,D) plot figure 11a,
   where ML and MU states misleadingly appear to be relevant.
   The (e1,...,e_n) projection is a viewpoint compiled from reference
   points within the dynamical structure, retaining information
   that is lost when taking global averages.
)

2) The eternal debate about the relevance of periodic boundary conditions
is here poorly addressed and actually overlooked. The whole dynamical
systems approach relies on the assumption of minimal flow unit in the
spirit of Jimenez & Moin or Hamilton, Kim and Waleffe. The original idea
at that time was to geometrically constrain the flow so much that only
the crucial elements for self­sustenance of non-trivial dynamics would
emerge. It seems that nowadays the original aim has been "forgotten" and
that these minimal flow units are mistaken for the turbulent flow itself.
The invoked idea of 'compromise' between computational efficiency and
physics is not sufficient. It is strange to see so much care about the
identification of discrete and continuous symmetries in the periodic box
and so little about the symmetry implied by considering periodic boundary
conditions.

(
   The referee is absolutely right in pointing out that there is a long
   distance between the minimal flow unit and large aspect ratio systems
   that we care about: we fully agree and discuss the limitations of such
   studies in the 'Conclusions and perspectives' section. Using a stubby
   periodic pipe is the aspect of our work that puts us furthest from
   realistic experimental flows. However, the hope of the community
   working out the exact dynamics of minimal flow units is that
   eventually they will provide blocks of the big puzzle (concurrently
   investigated by our colleagues using computational, statistical and
   phenomenological methods) which will enable us to compute averages
   such as dissipation rate from first principles, and provide a detailed
   maps of inertial manifolds -useful for control and like. That all is
   ahead of us. In the paper at hand, care has been taken in the
   identification of continuous symmetries, and the advocated reduction
   of these symmetries does not change the physics in any way. While the
   use of discrete symmetries aids computation, their use is not advised
   without caution in this work. This is evident in the case shown in
   figure 8b, where imposition of the (Z_2) mirror symmetry is seen to
   restrict the dynamics to a small region near the upper branch. This
   restriction was therefore removed. The original aim is not forgotten,
   as our aim here is indeed to locate the crucial elements of
   turbulence. TWs have already helped reveal the properties of
   turbulence in recent years, but they do not describe the dynamics. Nor
   will a continuation method provide any information on whether the
   resulting state is actually important. For this reason we apply the
   method of slices to turbulence itself, and to include dynamics we must
   go beyond TWs to (relative) periodic orbits.

   Now that the technique has been shown to work on short periodic
   pipes we are ready to probe long pipes in which turbulent puffs, as
   observed in experiments, can be readily simulated.

)

3) In the introduction, the focus is loosely on 'turbulent flows' whereas
the real context here is that of wall-bounded parallel turbulent flows.
To which flows the ideas of this paper can be extended to, would be
welcome. The authors should improve the introduction and conclusion
according to this comment, keeping in mind that this is Journal of Fluid
Mechanics and not a dynamical systems journal.

(
   We work here with pipe flow because any recurrent solution must be
   {\em relative} periodic, so there is no option but to reduce
   continuous symmetries if one aims at elucidating the dynamics.  But
   what we have in mind is any flow with continuous symmetries: could
   be plane Couette, a triply periodic box, baroclinic instability, or
   a spherical heart.  We now conclude the article with a new
   paragraph to this effect.
)

4) Most figures containing state space projections should be re-done and
shown with a decent size. Labels for TWs should be added, as well as
arrows along trajectories. The arrows for the velocity field in Figure 7
are hardly visible.

(
  The number of arrows has been reduced and their size enlarged in
  Figure 7 (and 12). Labels have been added to figures 1,7,8,9,11 and 12.
  (Label font+size will be altered when replaced by JFM.)
)

What do we learn from the (E,I) plots compared to the (D,I) plots?

(
  The (E,I) plot does not force equilibria to lie on the diagonal like
  the (D,I) plot. The application of averages, however, still wipes out
  much important information. For example, the ML and MU states still
  appear to lie within the turbulent dynamics, whereas state space
  projections clearly demonstrate that they lie far from the ergodic
  region.
)

5) The search for RPOs should be better described. Are the recurrence
plots evaluated on a special trajectory, such as those on the unstable
manifold of TWs? Or are they simply along random turbulent trajectories?
Such recurrence plots seem very costly to produce in terms of storage and
CPU time. Also, how good is the residual of the Newton scheme for
converged RPOs?

(
  Indeed the recurrence plot is costly to produce in terms of storage. In
  CPU time the method of slices reduces the cost by at least an order of
  magnitude, as the need for searches over possible shifts is eliminated.
  The recurrence plots are shown for random turbulent trajectories.
  The residual of the Newton scheme, |u(T)-u(0)|/|u(0)|, is approximately
  1/10000 for the longest orbit and considerably less for the others.
  We have now added text to this effect to Sect 5.2.
)


Referee minor comments:
=======================

1) 	'tiny' is perhaps not the most relevant term for the RPOs with gentle
temporal variations since they are still finite-amplitude solutions of
the stability equations. Weakly modulated travelling wave or simply
'modulated travelling waves' seems more adequate.

(
    We replaced 'tiny' by `modulated travelling wave' throughout, but
    unhappily: this makes a `modulated travelling wave' appear different
    from a \rpo, whereas they are both \rpo s, the difference being only
    the subjective one, that one is 'tiny'. Not sure that all our readers
    know that MTWs = RPOs. MTWs are really just deformed Hopf cycles
    bifurcated off TW, whereas RPOs are like POs - they are formed by
    stretching and folding and are global.
)

2) 	I like the joke about Ulan-Bator but I am not sure that Cambridge
University Press would like to get into trouble with the community of the
Mongolian readers of JFM.

(
     Point well taken, indeed, the only point taken up by both referee #1
     and #3. Following suggestion by referee #3, the text had been
     changed to Timbuktu, until the disastrous news came about
     destruction of this beautiful ancient city. Not funny, so we
     replaced it by the always safe choice: North Pole.
)

3) 	P. 17 'Its attracting manifold therefore appears to penetrate into
the turbulent region...' The idea is interesting, but 'higher-friction
region' is probably more adequate here than 'turbulent'.

(
    'turbulent region' has been replaced with 'high-friction'.
)

4) 	Abstract: 'chaotic attractor'. Actually the turbulence is claimed to
be transient for the case at hand so it is not properly speaking an
attractor.

(
    'chaotic attractor has been replaced with 'chaotic saddle'
)

5) 	End of p.5 "First one identifies (...) in whose neighbourhoods the
turbulent flow spends most of his time." This is difficult to know a
priori. Also nothing in the paper shows that the TWs mentioned here are
really visited by random trajectories.

(
   The text has been amended to "in whose neighbourhoods it is
   suspected that..."
   It is quite true that it is difficult to know which TWs will be
   important in advance, but it is possible to start from each and
   for this projection it is easy to discern whether the trajectory
   returns to the TW.  In this paper, this type of projection
   shows more clearly that random trajectories actually visit
   a select few of the TWs, much better than other projections.
   More on this below.
)

6) 	Beginning of Section 4.1: is that perhaps the proper place where to
include the definition of the action 'g' ?

(
   The method of slices is general, and thus introduced (with eye to
   applications to flows other than the pipe flow) in Section 3.
   Section 4.1 describes a particular application to pipe flows.
)

7) 	p. 14, the Newton scheme used to find the shift l(t) is reminiscent
of the technique used by Mellibovsky et al. (2011a).

(
   We have cited the earlier reference Viswanath (2007) which
   describes the method in considerable detail.
)

8) 	Is the spatial resolution good enough?

(
   The resolution compares favourably with that used in the
   minimal box calculations of Jimenez \& Moin 1991.  A comment
   has been added at the beginning of section 4.
)

9) 	It is claimed that RPOs can not be found without the slicing
technique. So how did Viswanath (2007) manage to identify them in plane
Couette flow?

(
    A symmetry reduction scheme is not needed for Newton determination of
    a single invariant solution, or a study of its bifurcations. Any
    local section and slice plus time and shift constraints does the job.
    Indeed, Viswanath has found several RPOs for plane Couette by
    checking for close returns on the (I,D) plot (though no one has been
    so lucky for pipe flow - we argue here that the symmetry-reduction
    computational savings are essential), and for Kuramoto-Sivashinsky it
    is possible to compute 60,000 RPOs without symmetry reduction. Once
    we have more than one invariant solution, the question is: how is
    this totality of solutions interrelated? For that, in our experience
    a practical symmetry reduction scheme is a necessity.
)

10) The fact that the LB solution lies on the edge is already known from
Duguet, Willis and Kerswell 2008.

(
   A reference to Duguet, Willis and Kerswell (2008) has been added at
   this point.
)

11) Are only TWs and RPOs to be expected? What about unstable tori?
(
    A very good point: it might be that partially hyperbolic invariant
    tori play important role in turbulent dynamics, but they are well
    beyond what we believe can be determined numerically with present day
    methods. And we are reluctant to add this scholarly remark to the
    text proper, in order not to further confuse the already befuddled
    reader...
)

------------------------------------------------------------
% pipes/slice/reviews/Response1.txt
% $Author: predrag $ $Date: 2015-05-04 10:57:54 -0400 (Mon, 04 May 2015) $
