                                                    9 Jul, 26 Oct 2012
JFM-12-S-0339
Revealing the state space of turbulent pipe flow by symmetry reduction
A. P. Willis, P. Cvitanovic and M. Avila

Authors responses to Referee 3
==============================

( The comments are given in full with author responses listed in
  parenthetical comments. The reference list is at the bottom of this
  text. The text edits are colored blue in the referee version of the
  resubmitted article. )

1. p3 the base flow specified seems inconsistent with non-dimensionalising
the radius by the diameter (r=1/2 should give U=0 no?)

(
   Thanks for the correction!  The statement of the base flow
   has been changed to  U(r) = 2 (1-(2r)^2).
)

2. In (2.4) please define wall units.

(
   The units are now defined in (2.4), using the wall friction
   velocity which is defined in the text following (2.1).
)

3. The sentence immediately under (2.6) (`There is no compelling...')
doesn't make sense to me.

(
   The erroneous text after `energy norm' has been removed.
)

4. The notation is not consistent. E.g. in section 2.2, phi is a phase
shift and g is a function of two arguments whereas in section 2.3, phi is
now a shift along the z-axis and g is now just a function of phi. In
(2.17), I presume \dot(g) is dg(phi)/dt=g'*dphi/dt rather than dg/dphi?

(
   In section 2.3 phi is a general SO(2) transformation, not necessarily
   the pipe azimuthal rotation of Eq. (2.10). Now clarified in the text.
   Also a note has been added after (2.14) that helps clarify the
   substitution made in (2.17).
)

5. What is M_TW in (2.19) and M_p in between (2.20) and (2.21)? (also
what is g_p?). BTW the ambiguity in the defn of g is highlighted between
(2.19) and (2.20).

(
   M_TW has now been defined at its first occurrence and M_p follows
   accordingly. They are respectively the N-dimensional group orbit
   manifold of the travelling wave, and the (N+1)-dimensional manifold
   traced out by a relative periodic orbit times its group orbit.
   Now made explicit in the text.
)

6. Just below (3.2), `The entire group orbit of `a' is then replaced ...'
- this confused me - better to write the entire time evolution of `a'?

(
   The group orbit is spanned by the transformations, shifts here, rather
   than being the evolution in time. At each instant in time every state
   space point has its group orbit, which is independent of the dynamics.
   We have added "At every instant in time," and "on the group orbit" to
   help clarify - it now reads
   "At every instant in time, the entire group orbit of a is then
   replaced by the closest match on the group orbit to the template
   pattern."
)

7. last paragraph p 11, first sentence `When a is varies...', remove 'is'?

(
   Corrected.
)

8. I don't understand the reference to `Ulan Bator' - maybe this is
cultural - I would have chosen `Timbuktu'...

(
  Point well taken. The text had been changed to Timbuktu, until the
  disastrous news came about destruction of this beautiful ancient city.
  Not funny, so we replaced it by the always safe choice: North Pole.
)

9. The choice of template is not completely clear. In section 5.1, the ML
state is used without much discussion for the (S,Z_2) subspace but all
the travelling waves of table 1 are pressed into action for the larger
(S) subspace. Ultimately one was chosen to generate figure 9a - which
corresponds to the dot at (0,0) - but which is this and why was it
chosen? Is it again ML as shown in figure 9b (so looking at all the TWs
ultimately proved redundant?). I don't understand what 'switching between
one local slice to the next nearest one' means. As I understand it, one
chooses a' at the start to define the template and then that is it bar
deciding on the low-D projection to show the dynamics on a 2D surface,
right?

(
   Indeed ML is at the centre for figure 8a, indicated in the caption. In
   section 5.1 a paragraph following equation (5.1) has been added,
   further explaining the reasoning behind its selection for the
   presented projections. The sentence regarding switching of templates,
   shortly before section 5.2, has been rephrased and a reference added
   to the section on templates. In summary, for the current state at each
   instant in time, we choose the shift that takes the state to the
   nearest point on its group orbit to the current template. This is the
   the point in the slice. For the switching implemented here, if the
   shift matches that for another template, and that other template is
   closer to the current state than the current template, then we switch.
)

10. p14 `The method of slices, however, enables us to determine close
recurrences from symmetry-reduced time series and locates the most
dynamically important solutions' - why? It seems to me one has to
systematically use each simple invariant solution as a template and then
examine the dynamics from this perspective (e.g. does the origin get
approached often) - am I right or have I missed something?

(
   With the symmetry reduction the return to a point on a periodic orbit
   gives return to the same point on the slice projection, and hence to
   the same point on a chosen plotted projection. Approach to an invariant
   solution shows up as approach of the trajectory to the invariant
   solution's fixed point in the projection. In practice, some chosen
   projections for the plot will show this better than others. See the
   new text following equation (5.1).
)

11. p21, first sentence of the last paragraph, how has the italicised
`must' be established? Who is to say that the dynamics in G is not as
important as M/G? (e.g. in weak wave turbulence, the fact that the phases
of the wave field evolve chaotically there seems important). Also the
immediately following sentences seem to talk to a different point
-specifically the ultimate utility of studying dynamics in symmetric
subspaces. Is the point that past work has eliminated these symmetries by
pinning the dynamics instead (e.g. non-periodic b.cs. instead of periodic
ones?) and thereby simplified things too dramatically?

(
   It is important to note that the symmetry reduction does not alter the
   dynamics, as the original configuration is recovered by applying the
   phase shift. For the case described, the phase speed may be sensitive
   to changes in the state, i.e. it may be necessary to use templates
   that are nearby but happen to have quite different associated phase
   speeds. Pinning the dynamics is indeed an example that is likely to
   have simplified the dynamics too dramatically. Comments have been
   added to the paragraph.
)

12. The manuscript gives the impression that good guesses for relative
periodic orbits are more easily isolated after the symmetry reduction and
plotting procedure than otherwise. This might be true but what is the
evidence? I could imagine constructing a norm comparing initial and final
flow states which builds in the translational symmetry present (e.g.
minimising the `distance' over axial shifts). My point is how does the
reader know that this won't work just as well?

(
   Such a procedure might work to locate recurrences, but the search over
   all possible shifts at every time requires at least an order of
   magnitude greater computational effort, per symmetry reduced
   dimension. It would not systematically, in an obvious way, lead to
   visalisations or projections that are required for analysis of the
   dynamical pathways of related trajectories.
)


------------------------------------------------------------
% pipes/slice/reviews/Response3.txt
% $Author: predrag $ $Date: 2015-05-04 10:57:54 -0400 (Mon, 04 May 2015) $
