Dear Prof. Öttinger,

I am writing to apply for a post-doctoral position in your group, in response to the advertisement in your website. I received my PhD in Physics from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2009, working on non-linear dynamics with Prof. Cvitanovic. I am currently working as a postdoctoral researcher at the French atomic energy commission (CEA) in the Paris region, focusing in the kinetic theory of plasmas. Besides attaching my CV, which focuses on the research results, I would also like to highlight here some aspects of my previous research experience that reveal its relevance to your work.

My PhD thesis work focused on the statistical description of turbulent and spatio-temporally chaotic systems, within the framework of equilibrium (Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen) measures. In particular, we seek a geometric understanding of dissipative, turbulent flows as dynamical systems in a high-dimensional state space. This in turn leads to the quantitative prediction of statistical averages by relating the spectrum of evolution operators (acting on measures) to the spectrum of periodic orbits. From a computational perspective, this implies that the only time-integration required to perform averaging is restricted to the well controllable computation of a hierarchy of periodic orbits. Although the theory of such cycle expansions is powerful, many factors complicate its application (for example the existence of continuous symmetries, whose treatment was the main topic of my thesis). 

As a postdoc, I moved on to the study of the collisionless Boltzmann equation coupled to an electric field in a plasma (the Vlasov-Poisson system) in relation to laser-plasma interaction problems. In this context, I am working with CEA collaborators on the problem of stability and collective modes of nonlinear Vlasov-Poisson equilibria. Motivated by analogous studies in dissipative fluids I devised a method that would allow representation of the problem by truncated series expansions. However, the advection (ballistic) term in Boltzmann equation is known to create structure in very fine velocity-space scales, thus putting the very concept of projection onto a finite dimensional basis in jeopardy. Although I was able to handle this problem by analytic transformations designed to undermine the importance of the advection term in the spectrum, more tools from dissipative systems seem hard to carry over. In particular, the conservative nature of this system makes the relevance of equilibrium measures hard to justify and I was eventually forced to look for more general approaches of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics. This is how I came to know about your research.

What I find particularly appealing in your methodology is that, not only is it based on a more general framework than what I have worked with so far, but it furthermore relies on developing physical rather than geometrical insight on the system under question. Moreover, it bypasses brute-force statistical averaging from long trajectories in favor of very controllable calculations. This latter point was exactly what I found appealing in cycle expansions and in general fits very well with my bias towards `semi-analytic' approaches as compared to computer experiments.

I thus believe that endorsing your GENERIC framework is not optional for me - I have to do it anyway to complement my tools and overcome my current difficulties. Of course, I don't think there would be a better way of achieving this goal other than working in your group. I realize I do not fit your typical candidate profile, as I do not have experience in molecular simulations or Monte-Carlo methods. I do however have sound foundations in classical statistical mechanics (and certain aspects of non-equilibrium theory) and I would be very enthusiastic about filling the gaps. Moreover, I would be interested in applying for external funding to work in your group if you would consider this option (for instance I meet the formal requirements to apply for the ETH fellowship). A possible starting date would be placed in late summer or early autumn of 2011.
 
Thank you very much for your consideration. 

Sincerely,

Evangelos Siminos

encl: Curriculum vitae with list of publications and active links to preprints and reprints.

-- 
Evangelos Siminos
Postdoctoral Fellow
Département de Physique Théorique et Appliquée
Commissariat à l'Énergie Atomique
CEA, DAM, DIF
91297 Arpajon Cedex, France
www.cns.gatech.edu/~siminos
office phone: +33169267361





