Author responses to review #3. The review is given in full with author 
responses listed in parenthetical comments. John Gibson, 11 Feb 2008

This manuscript considers the flow dynamics of plane Couette flow
restricted to a small box and in a symmetric subspace. The novelty in
the paper is the representation of the dynamics in low (2D and 3D)
projections based upon suitably-symmetrized versions of known
invariant solutions. In so doing, the authors find more structure (in
the form of heteroclinic connections and manifolds acting as confining
boundaries) in the dynamics than could reasonably be expected. The
results are very interesting and deserve to be in the literature. I
have a number of comments and questions to hopefully improve the
presentation.

1) tau_z u_LB is not marked on fig 2. This should be commented on.

(JFG: You mean tau_z u_NB, right? I added a comment. Thank you.)


2) There are some recent references which could be usefully added to
the introduction. Schneider, Eckhardt and Vollmer (PRE 2007), and
Kerswell & Tutty (JFM 2007) both attempt to relate
travelling waves to turbulent pipe flow dynamics. The latter
includes an investigation of the neighbourhoods of some lower branch
solutions.

(JFG: thank you very much.)

3) The `introduction' + sections 2,3 and 4 are all introductory for
section 5, the results section. In fact, authors acknowledge this by
suggesting the reader go directly to section 5. This indicates to me
that the present ordering is not a good way of setting things
out. Should more of this preliminary material go into appendices? (and
see point 12 which suggests losing some of the present appendices...)
Is it all necesary? For example, what's the point of section 3.1 which
seems irrelevant for section 5?

(JFG: Agreed. Reduced these seciton drastically and eliminated appendices.)

4) typo in defn of s_2, `2' for `z'

(JFG: s_2 is intentional. There's too much going on in these symmetries to
relate their subscripts to their action on x,y, and z.)


5) Bottom of p14, ``U_S intersects this torus lie at only four
points'', there looks to be a word missed out of sentence but even
allowing for this I can't make sense of it. U_S should be a torus,
with each member related to 3 other points by half-cell shifts. What
allows the authors to restrict to one member and its shifted partners?
It's almost as if a certain phase is chosen somewhere...

(JFG: Sorry about the lack of clarity in this paragraph. I rewrote it.
Please let me know if the new version is sufficient.)

6) I found statements `In what follows we mostly focus on dynamics in
U_S' at the end of S4.1 and a similar one on p22 unhelpful. You either
`do' or you `don't' or you adopt a default and warn of exceptions.

(JFG: Right. Fixed. Thanks)

7) In section 5.1.1 (p24), ``The plane Couette system at hand has a
total of 13 known equilibria...'', (again) I don't understand why
there are not a continuum of states in U_S. (This is related to query 5).

(JFG: I hope the revised discussion of symmetry clarifies this. Restricting 
to the U_S symmetric subspace is like restricting a periodic function to be 
antisymmetric about the origin. Only a few special discrete translations of the 
periodic+antisymmetric function are also periodic+antisymmetric, namely the 
translations by half the periodic cell size.)

8) Equation (5.2), it may be worth stressing that the e^(i)_EQ is not
an invariant solution nor part of an orthogonal coordinate system. In
fact it is not obvious what the coordinates of u_EQ are in this
symmetrised and antisymmetrised u_EQ system....Can all parts of this
projection be reached by any member of U?

(JFG: Point 1: Done, thank you. Point 2: True, but I think discussing this 
might be more confusing than helpful! Point 3: I don't understand. Any member 
of U projects to a single point; every point in the projection corresponds to
an infinity of U states above it).

9) How was u_NB found? This seems fairly crucial when the text
subsequently describes its unstable manifold. Did you work backwards
somehow from U_LB along the heteroclinic connection? Did you restrict
the dynamics to the laminar-turbulent boundary?

(JFG: Discussed this at greater length. Thanks.)

10) p30, typos in W^u_{\tau_z u_LB} and W^u_{\tau_xz u_LB}

(JFG: Fourth line down? Those are correct. I put more detail in the 
figure captions to help associate terms like these with the parts of
the figures.)

11) Figure 11 and the surrounding explanation connecting trajectory
splits to the influence of the tau_x-symmetric counterpart is hard to
digest. Better explanation please.

(JFG: I tried to improve this section, partly by revising what is now fig 7. 
I hope this helps.}

12) Figure 12 is fascinating.

(JFG: Thank you!)

13) Are all the appendices necessary? I didn't feel the urge to look
there once. For example, A.5 must be better presented in a book
somewhere? Is Appendix B necessary? Doesn't figure 7 do the job? If
you want to provide calibration points for future workers, how about
mentioning just a few key numerical values in the caption?

(JFG: Removed appendices except for eigenvalue tables, which are 
reduced. We listed eigenvalues both for calibration points and to 
show the symmetries of the eigenfunctions.)
