Author responses to review #2. The review is given in full with author 
responses listed in parenthetical comments. John Gibson, 11 Feb 2008


Article: Visualizing the geometry of state space in plane Couette flow
Authors: Gibson, Halcrow, and Cvitanovi'c Review:

The usual practice in computational and experimental fluid mechanics
is to visualize velocity fields in physical space and to look for
structures in such visualizations -- structures structures such as the
robust high speed streaks in pipe flow identified in an excellent
paper by Faisst and Eckhardt.

For a dynamicist, a velocity field is just a point in phase space. 
Thinking in phase space is vital to all the concepts and methods of
dynamical systems. Yet attempts to visualize turbulent dynamics in
phase space have never been successful. The great difficulty is that
the phase space is infinite dimensional. Using Fourier or other modes
leads to messy plots that reveal nothing. The best attempt on this
problem to date is the POD work. In that body of work, states are
identified using the singular value decomposition to obtain good low
dimensional projections.

This paper is another attempt to get good low-dimensional projections
of turbulent motions. It has in it visualizations that are remarkably
simple and reveal the sort of information that was inaccessible to
earlier methods (see Figures 10 and 12 for example).

There are a few beautiful ideas in this paper. These ideas could be
applicable to visualization of experimental data and to fields that
are unrelated to fluid mechanics. The range of applicability will
become clear only after further work.

The first point in obtaining good projections of curves from high
dimensions to 2 or 3 dimensions is related to elementary differential
geometry. The projections to the osculating and rectifying plane can
be revealing while the projection to the normal plane can make the
curve look more complicated than it is, with artificial cusps and so
on (please see Chapter 3 of Advanced Calculus by D.V. Widder). Thus
the trick is to find a basis that is never orthogonal to the curve. 
POD is a partially successful attempt to find such a basis. This paper
uses exact solutions of the Navier-Stokes equation to find such a
basis.

The second point is dynamical invariance. Though this concept is
discussed in the paper, the discussion could be a bit clearer. 
Something is dynamically invariant if it does not depend on the choice
of coordinates. The choice of exact solutions as the basis ensures
such invariance to an extent. However, the projection could be
coordinate dependent. In section (4.1), the authors say they chose the
inner product that corresponds to the energy norm for convenience. In
fact it is more than convenience, and the choice works well because
the notion of energy is intrinsic to the physics of fluid flow. If one
were to use these methods for pipe flow, for instance, it may be
important use the energy norm, even though that choice is not so
convenient.

The third point is that the authors use shifted versions of the same
solution to obtain a basis. It is not clear why that works, but I note
that some experimental papers from the 70s seem to give some intuition
about the significance of translations to turbulence.

I would rate this paper with some of the best articles in JFM. It
certainly belongs to the top-most quartile of computational papers. I
recommend it for publication, but with some comments that follow.

1. The authors label the equilibrium solutions they use as Waleffe
solutions. An examination of the record of publications shows that the
label is not justified.

Nagata computed the plane Couette equilibrium solutions with no-slip
boundaries in 1990. His computations were VERY difficult to execute,
especially considering the time when they were done. The notion of
upper and lower branch solutions was introduced by Nagata. In 1997, he
published computations of traveling wave solution of plane Couette
flow. His work was followed by that of Clever, Busse, and others in
the early 90s.

Waleffe's 1998 paper uses free-slip boundaries. His 2001 paper uses
no-slip boundary for plane Poiseuille, but says a similar continuation
from free-slip to no-slip can be used for plane Couette flow. One can
find the computation for Couette flow only in his 2003 paper, 13 years
and eight cycles of Moore's law after Nagata's publication.

I ask the authors to pause and reflect upon how all this might seem to
Nagata. The introduction to Waleffe 2003 might seem to him like a long
attempt to minimize the significance of his contribution. That
introduction has long and grateful discussions of the work of
Townsend, Malkus, Binney, the self-sustaining process, and so on, but
Nagata is barely mentioned. The authors' nomenclature might strike him
as a little odd as well.

I certainly acknowledge that Waleffe's work is brilliant in many ways,
but it would be best if the authors take the above remarks into
account.

(JFG: I'm very grateful for this correction. I went back, did a better
of the literature, and rewrote the introduction.)

2. On page 7, the authors plainly state that some observations in pipe
flow lend experimental support to the exact coherent states of Waleffe
1998. The problem here is that solutions of a certain differential
equation are not relevant to physical flows that obey a completely
differential equation. The key idea that made these observations
possible was the focus on high speed streaks in pipe flow. I am told
that idea was due to Eckhardt.

(JFG: I believe this is now addressed more accurately in the revised 
introduction. Faisst & Eckhardt (PRL 2003) and Wedin & Kerswell (JFM 2004)
both credit Waleffe's self-sustaining process as a foundation of their
derivations of traveling waves. These solutions are then *perhaps* 
observed as noted below.)

3. The statement on page 9 that computed traveling waves have been
observed in pipe flow is an exaggeration. The observations find high
speed streaks that are strikingly close to the computations, but there
is no information as yet about the match with regard to wave speeds
and wavelengths.

(JFG: Thank you. This is now addressed more accurately in the revised intro.)

4. The authors can consult the book by Schmid and Henningson for
another perspective on low dimensional models.

(JFG: I did consult Schmid and Henningson but didn't find commentary on low-d
models. Can you give me a chapter or page?) 

5. For the linear stability of the laminar solution, it is better to
cite Kreiss, Lundbladh, and Henningson over Romanov. That KLH paper
has a stronger and more accessible result.

(JFG: I eliminated the discussion of laminar stability while condensing the
review material, but I'm grateful for the reference.)

6. I urge the authors to consider making an online version of their paper
available in color and with movies, if that is possible.

(JFG: Movies are available at cns.physics.gatech.edu/~gibson/PCF-movies. An 
online, colored version of the revised draft will be available on arXiv. An 
online paper for the SIAM Journal of Applied Dynamical Systems is in preparation.) 
