Author responses to Review article ;) on `Visualizing the geometry of 
state space in plane Couette flow' submitted to JFM by Gibson, Halcrow 
and Cvitanovi'c.   John Gibson, 11 Feb 2008

The review is given in full with author responses listed in parenthetical 
comments.


This is a state space study of plane Couette flow at Re=400. The
quality and quantity of work reported here is very impressive. 
Recently discovered `exact coherent states' are studied and their
unstable manifolds are investigated. The numerical accuracy of the
known coherent states is improved and their stability is studied in
the full state space as well as the symmetric space of the states
using modern iterative methods (GMRES, Arnoldi). Important symmetries
of the solutions are discussed carefully. Symmetric translates of the
basic coherent states are shown to participate in controlling the
transient turbulent dynamics. A new steady state (the `newbie') is
discovered in the stable manifold of one of the earlier states (the
`lower branch state'). Visualizations of the state space are performed
by projecting the flow onto a subset of invariant states. This is
certainly not the last, definitive paper on the subject, but to my
knowledge it is the first of what should be many papers on a new kind
of analysis of turbulence and likely to become a highly cited paper. I
recommend publication after some minor revisions having to do with the
presentation of the work. In particular, section 2, which reviews
earlier work, needs more citations and reorganization.

Abstract and Intro are well-written, although abstract sentence: `What
emerges ... is a surprisingly simple (...) visualization of
moderate-Re turbulence' may be an excessive claim.

(JFG: fixed)

Intro, 1st sentence: `envisioned' instead of `visualized' Fig 2
caption, and other places, write 61 506 instead of 61, 506. 

(JFG: fixed)

Section 2, `Coherent structures: Observations and theory' needs work. 
`engineers and applied mathematicians' instead of `physicists and
engineers'. Physicists have contributed little to this line of work,
prior to this paper. `Engineers, physicists and applied
mathematicians' to cover all bases.

(JFG: fixed)

`low-dimensional behavior' needs to be explained/qualified otherwise
this will be misunderstood by many JFM readers as meaning `low-order
models'.

(JFG: fixed)

Page 7: `Waleffe (1998, 2001)' instead of `Waleffe (1998)'. The term
`exact coherent structures' was first used in Waleffe (2001).

(JFG: fixed)

`..., in plane Couette flow, first observed by Kim et al (1987)' :
`first' may not be correct since there had been much work on near-wall
coherent structures since the 1950's, also Kim, Moin and Moser (1987)
is only channel flow.

(JFG: fixed)

The 1st par of section 2 is likely to tick off many engineers who
worked on coherent structures in the 60's, 70's, 80's and 90's. It
gives the impression that the recent pipe flow work started
everything, while in fact it came after much work in boundary layers,
channel flow and Couette flow. The POD work for instance was inspired
by all that earlier work on coherent structures. Some references
should be added to the `engineers and applied mathematicians'
sentence, prior to the pipe flow citations (e.g. Kline et al JFM 1967,
Cantwell Ann.Rev., Robinson Ann.Rev., Holmes et al book, Panton book,
or other significant references). 

(JFG: fixed)

The citation (van Doorne (2004)) probably is not the original paper on
stereoscopic PIV, nor a particularly significant publication in the
long history of these subjects (PIV, coherent structures,...).

(JFG: fixed)

 Van Doorne's visualizations are pretty but focus on initial transients
from specific types of disturbances (which typically develop into
horseshoe vortices). It is not at all clear that his early transients
visualizations have much to do with invariant states. The Hof, Juel
and Mullin (2003) citation is also out of place since that paper is
concerned with transition threshold and has little to do with coherent
structures and dynamics. 

One significant oversight here is the failure
to refer to the work on nearwall structures (e.g. Kline et al JFM
1967, ... ), the 100+ streak spacing and to make the connection with
figure 1 and the optimum scaling for such solutions (Waleffe 2003),
which matches that 100+ spacing as well as other observed scalings of
nearwall coherent structures and the complete form of the structures:
wavy streaks with staggered, counter-rotating streamwise vortices.

(JFG: fixed. Greatly appreciated.)

Page 7, par 2: `... jumps by a factor of 3 at Re=400' (factor
increases with Re). 

(JFG: fixed)

Page 7, par 3: remove `as opposed to channel and
BL flow ... by turbulence from outside BL'. That sentence is
confusing. It might be good to mention that PCF is the simplest shear flow. 

(JFG: Tried to revise these sentences to meet criticism.)

The Drazin and Reid citation is not useful since they just refer
to Romanov (1973). 

(JFG: fixed)

Remove the statement `with first bifurcation pushed
to infinity (Nagata (1990))' for which there is no evidence and is in
fact in conflict with statements and evidence in the Wang et al PRL
2007.

(JFG: fixed)

Page 8, par 3: `Prior to' is not correct. `Another class of low-order
models...' would be better. The main contribution of these works has
been to provide qualitatively correct low-order models of
Navier-Stokes, with energy-conserving quadratic nonlinearity, that
capture both the linear stability of the laminar flow and saddle-node
bifurcations of non-trivial 3D equilibria consisting of rolls, streaks
and streak undulation, the latter being the defining components of
observed near-wall coherent structures. Most POD models have spurious
linear instability of the laminar state and additional cubic
nonlinearities. The POD models use an a posteriori functional basis
deduced from turbulent data, the SSP-class of models use an a priori
divergence-free, orthogonal, normalized basis (in principle identical
to the appendix 2 basis).

(JFG: fixed, even borrowed some words --but not all!)

Page 9: section 2 overlooks the work of Hamilton et al (1995) which is
merely cited as `direct numerical simulations' (top of page 10). 
Hamilton et al (1995) sought to demonstrate the validity and
importance of the self-sustaining process for turbulent shear flows. 
They searched for the simplest (i.e. least disordered) example of a
sustained turbulent shear flow by continuation of turbulent Couette
flow in a 3D parameter space toward lowest Reynolds number. Thus they
identified a particular set of parameters (the `HKW cell') where the
flow evolution was most organized, nearly-periodic, and confirmed that
the roll, streaks and streak undulation seen in the near-wall region
were the key elements of a self-sustaining process. That work was the
direct inspiration for much later work and in particular for the work
of Kawahara and Kida and Viswanath.

(JFG: fixed. Greatly appreciated)

There are 2 or 3 main threads that are muddled in this section

(JFG: astute observation! Rewrote Intro entirely. See further notes below)

(1) The numerous experimental observations of coherent structures in
the near-wall region of turbulent shear flows, with their streaks,
quasi-streamwise vortices and wall-unit scaling. These observations
prompted POD models which take the existence of coherent structures as
an experimental fact and try to model the dynamics of the coherent
structures (recall that the Aubry et al. model was limited to the near
wall region and used POD of experimental data in an attempt to capture
coherent structures). 

(2) the SSP theory which sought to isolate the mechanisms responsible
for the very existence of coherent structures and identified rolls,
streaks and streak instability as the 3 key ingredients of a generic
3D self-sustaining process in shear flows. Waleffe's 4th order model
is the first rational model of the SSP, Hamilton et al is the first
`clean' DNS evidence of the SSP, and the SSP continuation method in
Waleffe (1998) is the full Navier-Stokes verification of the SSP that
enabled extension of this work to pipe flow (Faisst and Eckhardt,
Wedin and Kerswell, Pringle and Kerswell PRL 99, 2007 ) and also
prompted the work of Toh and Itano (2001), (2005) (worth citing). So
the SSP theory is the unifying thread that links much of the work
cited on pages 7-9 and that has led to the discovery of a multitude of
`exact coherent structures', traveling waves, periodic solutions, that
all consists of rolls, streaks and streak undulations, and linked
those global solutions to the observed near-wall structures as well as
to transition and onset of turbulence. 

(JFG: scoured the literature and revised intro considerably. thank you.)

The authors take a POD-like
point of view here that `roll-streak structures are important because
of their generic occurence...' (p. 7), that is, roll-streaks exist
because we see them in experiments and simulations. That is an
oversimplification, since we only see them so cleanly in the Couette
HKW cell, and that ignores the question why are roll-streaks so
ubiquitous in shear flows? which the SSP theory and SSP continuation
method has answered (in part, by unequivocally demonstrating that
`roll-streaks' can self-sustain leading to invariant coherent states. 
The next question is why are these observed in turbulent flows since
all the known coherent states are unstable. This requires studying
unstable manifolds of the ECS, as done in this paper). 

(JFG: We let the "importance because of their generic occurence" phrasing 
stand. The "generic occurence" is an oversimplification, but we don't have 
the space (or expertise!) to review the families of related structures 
adequately. About their importance, we believe that it truly does hinge on 
their occurence in nature. We study plane Couette because such structures 
occur there in their simplest form and so lend themselves to theoretical 
analysis such as SSP. We hope to examine state-space dynamics through 
the framework of the SSP in a future paper.)


(3) The 3rd underlying thread here is the difference between low-order
models and low-order dynamics. The exact coherent structures and the
turbulent dynamics cannot be captured by low-order Galerkin
projections on general sets of orthogonal modes, yet the unstable
manifolds of the exact coherent structures are low-dimensional. The
latter is what is studied and visualized in this paper.

(JFG: brought this out more clearly)

Section 3 Both walls could be moving in the same direction in PCF, U
is the half of the difference between the wall velocities. The
`opposite velocity' is a special choice of Galilean frame of
reference.

(JFG: agreed, but I didn't think anyone else would care! revised)

p 11: write `...HKW cell (which exhibits `clean', nearly-periodic
sustained turbulence at Re=400)' [presumably any cell size would
exhibit turbulence at sufficiently high Re, what is special about the
HKW cell is that it appears to have a clean, nearlyperiodic sustained
`turbulent' state at the low Re=400].

(JFG: fixed)

The [2pi/1.14, 2, 4pi/5] cell is not `used in Waleffe (2003)'. Waleffe
(2003) studies PCF and PPF solutions as functions of (alpha, gamma) and
determines the optimum (alpha, gamma) corresponding to the lowest Re for
existence of the ECS. The (alpha, gamma) = (1.14, 2.5) cell is historically
connected to the HKW cell (alpha, gamma) ' (8/7, 5/3) as follows: 1.14 is a
rounded out 8/7, and 2.5=5/2 is half way between the fundamental 
gammaHKW = 5/3 and its harmonic 2 gammaHKW = 10/3, indeed 1.5 gammaHKW = 5/2. 
The (alpha, gamma) = (1.14, 2.5) cell emerged from a first but incomplete 
attempt (in Waleffe 2002, proceedings of Tokyo Symposium) at establishing
connections between steady state solutions and the Kawahara and Kida
periodic solutions found in the HKW cell. The steady state with
fundamental spanwise wavenumber gamma disappears (in a saddle-node
bifurcation) as gamma -> gammaHKW = 5/3, for alpha = 1.14 and Re = 400 fixed,
but a 1st harmonic (i.e. with 2 periods in z) steady state arises and
exists in the HKW cell.

(JFG: clarified. thanks.)

`Though this cell is too small to sustain turbulence' -> `Though this
cell appear to be too small to sustain turbulence at Re = 400'. Again,
presumably all cells have sustained turbulence at sufficiently high
Re. And it is not impossible that there is a small region of sustained
turbulence in state space in this cell at Re=400.

(JFG: clarified. thanks.)

Note, although not necessarily in the paper, that Schmiegel's
computations were grossly unresolved `medium order' models with d = 
1000 as I recall. Perhaps another reference/brief discussion to more
rigorous results should be added, e.g. to known sensitivity in the
Henon model?

(JFG: hmmm. left out this one.)

Last sentence of section 3.1 needs slightly more info/discussion. 
`optimistic hopes that turbulence is different from low-dimensional
chaos' ?! this sentence doesn't make sense to me. `Optimistic hopes
that turbulence is similar...' perhaps? Figure 4, shows that a single
solution can capture the mean velocity profile very well, and that is
all that engineers want in some applications, but of course we do not
know whether this is still true at higher Re. Comparison of Fig 4,
(a,b) to (c,d) suggests that more complex solutions may be needed to
capture higher order statistics indeed. But another main issue is a
selection issue: there are other `nearby' steady states and periodic
solutions (Viswanath) with roughly similar but somewhat different
statistics, which one(s) should be selected? If several of them need
to be considered, how should their contribution be weighted? etc.

(JFG: rewrote with more information and less tut-tutting :-))

(3.7): I would call sigma_2 a rotation, not a reflection. (OK, it could be
called a `doublereflection', or `reflection about the line x = 0, y =
0', but not just `reflection')

(JFG: changed to "discrete symmetries")


Last line of p 14: `... intersects this torus lie at only...' ?! 

(JFG: typo --thanks! rewrote more clearly.)


Section 4 

Could say F_NS(u) represents Navier-Stokes for u in (3.8), or
Navier-Stokes projected onto the subspace (3.8). For traveling waves,
use u_TWS instead of u_EQ? Also, because of symmetries and walls,
shouldn't it be c d/dx, at least c * \hat{y} = 0.

(JFG: done)

State/emphasize what d is, typically, for the computations performed
here. 

(JFG: done)

Section 5 

Section 4.1, gives the impression that one needs to
construct a divergence-free basis explicitly, but the begining of
section 5 states that this is not the case (that's good). So can't
4.1, 4.2 be shrunk and Appendices A2 and A3 omitted? They do not seem
necessary and the paper is already very large.

(JFG: cut)

(5.1), why not normalize and project fields on unit vectors? (as
defined in (5.2)) what are advantages/disadvantages of both
projections?

(JFG: they were meant to be normalized done. added short comment)

Following (5.1), e_n or e^{n}? 

(JFG: switched to e_n throughout. thanks.}

P 13, `a total of 13 known equilibria (there may be more)'

(JFG: confusing, removed}

`projections that respect the half-cell translation symmetries',
explain why projection on any plane defined from any of the equilibria
in the symmetric space would not automatically `respect the
symmetries'. This is not entirely obvious.

(JFG: rewrote. note that the subspace is symmetric in S={1,s1,s2,s1s2} but
*not* in T={1,tau_x, tau_z, tau_xz}: su = u for s in S, and tau u in S for 
u in S, but tau u \neq u for tau in T. The idea is that the chosen basis 
functions are *symmetric* or *antisymmetric* in the translation symmetries.)

`4d' is potentially confusing since `d' has been used for state space
dimension. `4- dimensional'. One solution is to use N or NS for state
space dimension.

(JFG: agreed, but one of my colleagues is fixated on $d$ as the dimension 
of a dynamical system. Maybe I can talk him into $N$ before we go to print.)

Top of page 27, it's e(2) that is antisymmetric, not e(1). 

(JFG: fixed)

In figure 7 and discussed in detail in Wang et al (2007) -> `in figure
7 for Re=400 and for much higher Re in Wang et al (2007)'

(JFG: fixed)

P 28, end of par 2: `in unstable manifold of uNB' (not LB)

(JFG: no, we really do mean the unstable manifold of LB)


end of section 5.2: `shear flow turbulence' instead of `boundary-layer
turbulence'. 

(JFG: fixed, thank you)


Top of page 30, `straddling the split near ... and ....' 
(same translate is repeated). 

(JFG: fixed, thank you)

2nd par on page 30 leaves the reader wanting. The data shows that
there is a split, so if there is no heteroclinic connection, what is
happening? was a search for another fixed point attempted? Does the
evolution stay in the symmetric subspace or are the other
instabilities masking a possible heteroclinic connection? There must
be translates of the NB that have heteroclinic connections to
translates of the LB, do those come into the picture? Is the NB a
lower branch NB connected to an upper branch NB (not yet isolated by
the authors)? Don't be afraid to speculate a bit here.

(JFG: addressed each of these points briefly. next paper will answer in 
full)

Figure 11 (b): the (b) label is missing in the caption. Also why not
show the LB and tau_x LB in 11 (b)?

(JFG: revised, included NB and LB)

Section 5.4: How much of a perturbation of NB is the initial condition? 
This is directly relevant to the lifetime. A smaller perturbation will of
course lead to a longer evolution. Emphasize that the 1000 time units
length is not due to a lot of spiraling around NB (at least it does
not appear to be), so most of those 1000 time units are spent in true
transient turbulence.

(JFG: good point. clarified)

Figure 12: the UB's appear to be on an outer surface containing the
transient turbulent trajectory. Is that just an illusion or do they
really form some sort of `upper bounding' surface, for this Re=400? 
(even if this is true, it might not be at higher Re, sustained
turbulence might occur when the flow can poke through that surface,
wild speculation).

(JFG: I would love to know the answers to these questions! I'm not
confident enough to speculate.)

Section 6 

P 36, end of par 2: it is not just the local eigenmodes that
could be useful, but also the global unstable manifolds and the
splitting regions. Could cite Kawahara, PoF 2005 and Wang et al (2007)
here.


(JFG: revised. thanks)

P 37, last par: that entire paragraph could be replaced by `low
Reynolds number'. `Reasonable' periodic cells (e.g. about 2/1/4 aspect
ratios) capture the statistics of experimental turbulence quite well
if the Reynolds number is large enough (e.g. Kim, Moin and Moser 1987
and countless DNS papers since then). We do not expect any significant
statistical differences between turbulence in the (alpha, gamma) = (1.14,
2.5) cell or the HKW (8/7, 5/3) cell for instance at Re = 1000 or so,
for instance. (This is the referee's expectation, not verified fact). 
So `small cell' is relative to the Reynolds number (which is the
channel height in some viscous units). Periodic boundary conditions in
x and z are OK, any `reasonable' aspect ratio is OK, but it's Re = 400
which is very low.

A bit of discussion that is missing here, or earlier in the paper, is
why this particular cell was selected. This may be for somewhat
arbitrary `historical' reasons, which is fine but should be mentioned
and explained. Waleffe (2003) determined `optimum' parameters for
plane Couette flow as (alpha, gamma) = (0.577, 1.15) corresponding to an
onset Reynolds number of 127.7. Why not start by studying the dynamics
near those parameter values? Or for those `optimum' (alpha, gamma) at a
succession of Reynolds numbers (say 150, 200, 250, 300, 350,...). 
These are apparently obvious research directions that could be
mentioned explicitly. Another obvious direction is to investigate the
change in behavior for alpha = 8/7 = 1.14 and Re = 400 fixed as gamma goes
from 5/2 (this paper) to 5/3 (the HKW cell where periodic solutions
are known).

(JFG: added explanation of particular geometry; parametric studies are 
coming in another paper. thanks! )

Appendices A1 is nice but may not be necessary. The algorithm is
standard and discussed in Canuto et al and on the Channelflow website.

A2 and A3 are not necessary in my opinion, as discussed earlier. 

(JFG: cut)

A4, the ||du/dt|| in table 2 for `elliptical truncation' was
presumably calculated with the Channelflow algorithm for cubic
truncation using the elliptically truncated data. Presumably, the
||du/dt|| computed with Waleffe's algorithm in the elliptical
truncation is much smaller than 5 10-4. Perhaps an asterisk is in
order.

(JFG: All the solutions had residuals near 10^{-14} in the solution 
of  the equilibrium equations. The ||du/dt|| reported here is different 
--it's the error when a given discretized solution is integrated with 
different evaluation of the nonlinear term. We found this to be an 
effective estimate of discretization error and a given spectral 
resolution. Cut this section, though.)

