                                                    May 17, 2010

        PURA Letter of Recommendation

                Applicant Information

                Student Name: Froehlich, Stefan
                Student GTID: 902134531

                Faculty Advisor Information
                Faculty Name: Cvitanovic, Predrag
                Faculty Email: predrag.cvitanovic@physics.gatech.edu


                Recommendation Questions

=== The students ability to carry out the proposed project. Please include
any past or present experience supervising this student in research (for
pay or credit), in a course, or in another capacity. Mention, if
appropriate and known, any previous research the student has performed in
the past under other advisors or away from Georgia Tech if you believe it
has bearing.

Froehlich was the best student in my senior/starting graduate
PHYS 4421 Physics of Continuous Matter course, Spring semester
2010, and he is doing well in studying parts of our advanced
graduate ChaosBook.org textbook. He was selected for GaTech
School of Mathematics summer REU in 2008, continued that
research into the fall, and he took part in the Cornell math
department summer 2009 REU. He has won the undergraduate award
for top non-graduating math student for the past 2 years. He is
a smart, focused student with good future in mathematics and/or
physics.

=== The relationship between the students project and your own research.

For his PURA project he will study the symmetry properties of
Navier-Stokes equations in the boundary-shear turbulence
problem that my group is investigating, and with the help of my
former graduate student E. Siminos and my postdoc John F
Gibson, the author of the code, master the use of
Channelflow.org. The proposed project is integral part of what
my group has to publish within a year or so - we are the only
group that has the exact solutions of Navier-Stokes that will
be used by Froehlich, but Gibson's and my time is better spent
scaling our project up to HPC implementation.

=== Explain how the funding will benefit both the student and yourself.
For example, does the funding completely enable the work to be undertaken
due to the students need for a part-time job? Or does the funding allow
you to begin research in a new area, follow a newly discovered trend in
your own research which is not currently funded, or develop an idea for a
possible new proposal?

Our theory of moderate Reynolds turbulence is opening a whole
new line of attack on understanding structures in boundary
layer flows, and we, together with our small cohort (US,
England, Germany, Japan) are very hopeful about the long term
impact on problems such as control of turbulence. We are a
recent entrant into this, traditionally engineering field, and
it takes some time to gain visibility for a new, physics
inspired approach that we are pursuing. Currently this research
is funded by a modest NSF applied mathematics grant (our
competition outside of US is considerably better funded).

Funding Froehlich will help this effort - we have no alternate
funding sources, and what he needs to learn and do requires
significant amount of time and strong focus. With his
performance so far, and if this project results in a
publication, Froehlich is heading for a top graduate math or
physics program in the country - that helps GaTech Mathematics
and Physics in its student recruiting. His proposed project is
totally new, made possible only by advances made by us in the
past 2 years.

=== Overall Evaluation of Applicant Relative to Peers.

                Outstanding

=== Additional comments with respect to this applicant that you feel would
be helpful to UROP in making final PURA decisions.

I hope Froehlich will make us proud, in the long run.
