
-------------------------------------------------------------
\\
Random text, perhaps useful....

[Predrag: this is excerpt from an earlier PURA proposal, rather
poorly written...]

Research Proposal Fall 2010

supervisor: Predrag Cvitanovi\'c


In the Fall 2010 I propose to carry out research at the School
of Physics of the Georgia Institute of Technology. This work is
a continuation of research which began during Summer 2010. The
research is to be headed by Professor Predrag Cvitanovic and is
in collaboration with John Gibson (GaTech), Evangelos Siminos
and Ashley Willis (Paris), Marc Avila and Bj\"orn Hof
(G\"ottingen) and Rich Kerswell (Bristol). We plan to study
aspects of fluid mixing that are interesting both from a
theoretical point of view as well as for their wide ranging
applicability to engineering and industry. Plane Couette flow
refers to the motion of a fluid created by the shearing of two
oppositely moving planar surfaces between which the fluid is
initially at rest. In the past year significant progress has
been made in understanding certain geometrical aspects of plane
Couette flow which were previously unknown. A formal
description of the symmetries invoked by periodic boundary
conditions has led to an understanding of interesting
properties of solutions of the Navier Stokes equations which we
hope to use in analyzing fluid mixing and chaotic advection, by
means of studying Lagrangian tracer particles. Specifically we
look to study the way in which invariant surfaces within the
fluid.... Progress towards this goal has been achieved in our
recent work with the theoretical discovery of points within the
fluid for which no motion occurs due to symmetry
considerations. Expanding on similar ways of thought should
lead to a broader description and understanding of the ways in
which [...] may occur within turbulent shear flows. Various
applications of such fluid mixing range from heat transport, to
chemical mixing in the pharmaceutical industry, to geophysical
studies of wind-driven ocean streamlines.

-------------------------------------------------------------


Overview: The state space of plane Couette flow. Introduce
symmetry reduction. Motivate the moving frames method when
looking at pipe flow [...]

Recent advances in experimental imaging, computational methods,
and dynamical systems theory suggest that the unstable
recurrent coherent structures observed in wall-bounded shear
flows (such as pipes and boundary layers) result from close
passes to weakly unstable invariant solutions of the
Navier-Stokes equations. These 3D, fully nonlinear solutions
(equilibria and periodic orbits) structure the state space of
turbulent flows and provide a skeleton for analyzing their
dynamics. In presence of continuous translational and
rotational symmetries the corresponding invariant solutions are
relative equilibria (traveling waves) and relative periodic
orbits. We describe the method of slices or moving frames,
which reduces the state space to a symmetry-reduced `slice'.
The reduction enables us to chart out the connections between
these `relative' or `equivariant' solutions in the state-space
representation introduced in (Gibson, Halcrow and Cvitanovic,
JFM 2008), and examine their role in organizing the dynamics of
turbulence.

---------------------------


----------------------------

Method of the moving frames: the state space of pipe flow

New classes of traveling wave solutions have recently been
found for pipe flow (Pringle, Duguet & Kerswell 2008). These
new solutions appear to be more fundamental than all previously
known solutions, in the sense that they appear at lower flow
rates, preserve more symmetries, and attain far higher
friction-factors. The previously known solutions have been
shown to be embedded within the laminar-turbulent boundary, but
a role within turbulence itself is yet to be established. In
this talk we present new projections of the high-dimensional
system, using the method of moving frames, in an effort to
examine the connections between solutions and their role in
organizing the dynamics of turbulence.
