Kinetic theory of multi-island magnetic reconnection



1. Introduction
---------------

Magnetic reconnection is a process during which the topology of magnetic
field lines in a plasma rapidly changes with an accompanying release of
magnetic energy. It is important in ... 

The classical picture of magnetic reconnection involves the formation
of `magnetic islands' see Fig. 1. Within dissipative magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), 
the mechanism responsible is the tearing instability of a current 
sheet (Furth et al. 1963) and its generalizations, most
notably the double tearing mode (Pritchett et al. 1980) which involves two
current sheets. Even though the literature on magnetic reconnection is vast,
theoretical predictions underestimate the energy release rate by a large factor 
compared to laboratory experiments and observations from astrophysical objects.
This in turn does not allow for accurate prediction of heating and acceleration
of particles through reconnection.

To overcome these difficulties, the present interest lies in two very
active directions. The first involves moving beyond MHD description 
to the study of kinetic effects, the importance of which has become 
apparent in many studies. The second direction is towards larger systems 
that encompass a wide range of spatial scales and lead to formation 
of secondary magnetic islands (known as plasmoids) and further 
magnetic reconnection through coalescence of islands
(Finn and Kaw 1977, Pritchett 2008, Oka et al. 2010). 

Our primary goal is to study the formation of multiple 
secondary magnetic islands and their reconnection through coalescence within 
kinetic theory. In particular we wish to develop a quantitative understanding of 
the 
a) instability growth rate, 
b) distribution of sizes of magnetic islands,
c) island coallescence rate,
d) the dependence of the above on the system parameters.

Point (a) refers to the primary instability of a current sheet through which
magnetic islands are created, as this quantity is of direct relevance to
the reconnection rate. In particular we wish to determine the spatial scale
that corresponds to the most unstable wavelength in the large system limit.
Point (b), the distribution of sizes of magnetic islands created by the primary
instability dictates the calculation of (c), as coallescence can be understood
as a result of instability of the multi-island system. The influence 
of secondary magnetic islands and of reconnection through their coalescence
is considered very important for the total reconnection rate (Fermo 2010).
In (d) above we refer, for instance, to the presence of an external magnetic 
field and to the geometry and the number of the initial current sheets.

Our primary tool to attack this problem will be a method for linear
stability computation of nonlinear Vlasov equilibria, developed by the
postdoctoral researcher (PR) and collaborators (Siminos et al. 2010).
This semi-analytic method, described in detail in Section 2, formulates
the stability problem as an eigenproblem in a Fourier-Hermite basis 
(in the space and velocity variables, respectively) of finite dimension.
Through this method we are able to compute the few fastest growing linear modes 
of nonlinear equilibria of the 
Vlasov-Poisson system using much fewer variables than with a finite difference
Vlasov solver or a Particle-In-Cell (PIC) code for the same accuracy. Extension
of the method to the fully relativistic Vlasov-Maxwell system is straightforward
and will allow us to efficiently study reconnection in large systems for
wide parameter ranges, involving both the primary and the secondary instability.
Our study will be supplemented by PIC code simulations, to address time
dependent questions. However, we expect that the stability study will help 
reduce computational requirements on the PIC simulations by providing  
information on the relevant length scales.










A. Unused text
--------------

An intriguing feature of recent PIC simulations (Oka et al. 2010) is the
formation of multiple magnetic islands of unequal length through a double
tearing instability. Mathematically, this comes as a surprise, due to the high
symmetry of the setting. The question then arises whether this is a result of
symmetry breaking due to the high numerical noise in PIC simulations or could be
traced to a more fundamental symmetry breaking instability in systems of large
spatial extend. Using the method developed in (Siminos et al. 2010) we can
address this issue by studying the primary instability leading to creation of
magnetic islands and the distribution of their sizes. 


The postdoctoral researcher (PR) and collaborators (Siminos et al. 2010) have
developed a semi-analytical framework for the study of stability for nonlinear
electrostatic electron plasma waves. The method is based on expansion of the
distribution function in a Fourier-Hermite basis (in space and velocity
variables, respectively) through which the problem is brought into a
finite-dimensional, sparse matrix eigenproblem. 




H. P. Furth, J. Killeen, and M. N. Rosenbluth, Finite-Resistivity Instabilities
of a Sheet Pinch, Phys. Fluids 6, 459 (1963), doi:10.1063/1.1706761 
J. M. Finn and P. K. Kaw, Coalescence instability of magnetic islands, Phys.
Fluids 20, 72 (1977), doi:10.1063/1.861709
WOPA (Workshop on Opportunities in Plasma Astrophysics), January 18-21, 2010,
Princeton, New Jersey, report available online at
http://www.pppl.gov/conferences/2010/WOPA/




