Lecturer (appointment will be to grade UE08 (£37,012-£44,166) or UE09)
Vacancy Ref: : 	005103 	Closing Date : 	13-Nov-2012
Contact Person : 	Karen Downie 	Contact Number : 	0131 650 6568
Contact Email : 	hr@maths.ed.ac.uk
The School of Mathematics is seeking outstanding candidates for up to two permanent lectureships in Applied and Computational Mathematics. Exceptionally an appointment may be made at a higher level (UE09 Senior Lecturer/Reader). We expect candidates to have either an established record of first-class research or to be able to demonstrate excellent research potential. You should have research interests which mesh well with those of existing staff. We are keen to expand our portfolio in one or more of the following priority directions: (a) numerical methods for stochastic or partial differential equations, (b) geophysical fluid dynamics, and (c) mathematical biology. You will contribute to our undergraduate and postgraduate teaching programmes and to the supervision of postgraduate students.

The posts are available at a mutually agreed date from 1 July 2013

Salary Scale: £37,012 - £44,166 per annum. Exceptionally appointment may be to Senior Lecturer level for which the salary scale is £46,846 - £52,706 pa)

Please Quote Ref: 005103 (previously advertised under vacancy reference 3016253).
The School of Mathematics is seeking outstanding candidates for up to two permanent lectureships in Applied and Computational Mathematics. Exceptionally an appointment may be made at a higher level (UE09 Senior Lecturer/Reader). We expect candidates to have either an established record of first-class research or to be able to demonstrate excellent research potential. You should have research interests which mesh well with those of existing staff. We are keen to expand our portfolio in one or more of the following priority directions: (a) numerical methods for stochastic or partial differential equations, (b) geophysical fluid dynamics, and (c) mathematical biology. You will contribute to our undergraduate and postgraduate teaching programmes and to the supervision of postgraduate students.

Start date and duration: From 1 July 2013, open-ended contract

Job Purpose

To pursue independent research, engage in knowledge transfer, develop and deliver teaching at all levels, and supervise graduate students. The post further involves undertaking administrative duties in teaching, student support or other university-related administration.

Main Responsibilities

Research

To undertake a clearly independent research programme at an international level in relevant areas
To disseminate and publish research findings or other innovative contributions through publications, workshops, conferences etc
To supervise research students
To plan an area of research and secure funding to support it

Additionally, for appointment at Grade 9

To undertake a research programme of demonstrable and significant international standing as well as with impact within a particular field
To demonstrate signs of research leadership, e.g. running a small group

Teaching and Learning

To plan, prepare and deliver effective teaching, both using and updating existing material and developing new coursework. To undertake curriculum development or course reorganisation as appropriate
To participate in the management of teaching by, for example, acting as a Course Organiser or postgraduate Programme Director
To support student teaching and learning by, for example, acting as a Personal Tutor, supporting student recruitment, or contributing to projects or committees at School, College or University level

Additionally, for appointment at Grade 9

To develop significant innovation in teaching methods and/or develop substantial areas of the teaching curriculum
To take a leadership role within the management of teaching
To take an active part in the strategic development of the School and undertake significant management roles as requested

Knowledge, Skills and Experience Needed for the Job

Essential

A PhD in an appropriate area
Research either of international quality or with clearly demonstrable international potential
Proven ability to disseminate research results through quality publications and presentations at workshops and conferences
Commitment to excellence in teaching
Demonstrable commitment to participating fully in academic life, including collaborative working
Desirable

Membership of ILT or completion of a formal tertiary qualification
Experience of curriculum development

Additionally Essential, for appointment at Grade 9

A research track record of international standing
A track record in securing funding for research
Evidence of research leadership
Evidence of excellence in teaching
Evidence of leadership and innovation in teaching

The Research Environment

The School is divided informally into research groups. In addition to specialist seminar series there is a School Colloquium which covers topics of general interest in the mathematical sciences as well a variety of activities such as graduate-level minicourses and reading working groups.

Algebra/Number Theory: Representation theory; noncommutative algebra; Lie algebras and quantum groups; growth properties of algebras; commutative algebra; automorphic forms; additive and algebraic number theory. The group is central in the EPSRC/CNRS Representation Theory Network and the Algebra and Representation Theory in the North (ARTIN) programme. There are significant links with researchers in mathematical physics, geometry and topology.

Analysis and PDE: Nonlinear and linear elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations, stochastic partial differential equations; harmonic analysis; dynamical systems; spectral theory. The group is involved with the UK Harmonic Analysis and PDE Network and the North British Functional Analysis Seminar.

Applied/Computational: Computational methods and numerical analysis of multiscale and homogenization problems, stiff and stochastic equations; water waves, inverse scattering and asymptotics; stellar dynamics and the N-body problem; computational dynamics, especially molecular dynamics; electromagnetic properties of composite mediums; exponential asymptotics and ordinary differential equations; complex-variable methods in free boundary problems; computational mathematical astronomy; nonlinear waves; fluid dynamics, with applications to the atmosphere and the oceans. The group is involved with the North British Differential Equations Seminar. The Edinburgh Simulation Group (ESG) brings together researchers from a variety of fields to help foster interdisciplinary approaches to computational modelling.

Geometry/Topology: Differential geometry and Lie groups; algebraic geometry, especially birational geometry of Fano varieties; surgery theory, quadratic forms, knot theory; geometric analysis, extremal and constant-scalar-curvature Kaehler metrics, self-duality in four dimensions, geometry of moduli spaces. There are collaborations with the algebra group and the mathematical physics group.

Mathematical Physics: Classical and quantum integrability; geometric and algebraic aspects of string theory; gauge/gravity correspondence and higher dimensional black holes. There is close contact with researchers in algebra and geometry and topology, and with the mathematical physics group at Heriot-Watt University: together these make up the Edinburgh Mathematical Physics Group (EMPG). The group is involved with the North British Mathematical Physics Seminar.

Operational Research and Optimization: Stochastic operational research; theory and parallel implementation of optimization methods for linear, quadratic and nonlinear programming, with applications to real-life problems; decomposition methods for large-scale nonlinear non-convex constrained optimization; global optimization. The group runs the Edinburgh Research Group in Optimization (ERGO) seminar. There is significant collaboration with the Management School, the School of Engineering and Electronics, and there is a growing portfolio of work with industrial partners.

Probability and Stochastic Analysis: Stochastic Dynamical systems, in particular Stochastic Differential Equations and Stochastic PDEs; Nonlinear Filtering and Stochastic Control; Hidden Markov Models; Applications of Stochastic Analysis in Mathematical Finance; Numerical Analysis of PDEs, of Stochastic PDEs and of Stochastic Differential Equations. The research group also organises the North British Probability Seminar and runs successful MSc programmes in Financial Mathematics (jointly with the Department of Actuarial Mathematics and Statistics at Heriot-Watt University) and in Financial Modelling and Optimization.

Statistics: Bayesian inference, computer-intensive methods, automated pattern recognition, sampling and resampling and multivariate analysis, with applications in forensic science, the mathematical and statistical evaluation of evidence, the earth sciences, agriculture, biology, ecology and applications of stochastic analysis to economics and finance.

There has been a long and fruitful collaboration with Biomathematics and Statistics Scotland (BioSS). There is a close relationship with the Joseph Bell Centre for Forensic Statistics and Legal Reasoning which conducts research at the interface of statistics, law, forensic science and artificial intelligence.

Teaching

The University of Edinburgh's academic year consists of two semesters, the first running from mid-September to mid or late December and the second from early January to late March. This is followed by a revision and examination period which runs from mid-April to the end of May. The School encourages its postgraduate research students and research fellows to involve themselves in its teaching activities, and many of the tutorials are given by them.

Newly appointed lecturers can expect a reduced teaching load in their first two years: usually one course plus tutorials in their first year, two courses in their second year and then between two and three such courses subsequently. Permanent members of academic staff may request leave on full pay (sabbatical leave) for one semester for every four years in post. At the discretion of the Head of School, leave may be granted more frequently to staff with very active research programmes.

Undergraduate Teaching: The School's teaching was very well reviewed in the most recent SHEFC Teaching Quality Assessment exercise. It has responsibility for teaching Pure and Applied Mathematics, OR and Statistics to students of the honours programmes (BSc or MA) in Mathematics and in Mathematics and Statistics (BSc), as well as several combined honours programmes. There is a MMath degree beyond the honours degrees.

The School also provides teaching for a range of other disciplines in the University. The School takes teaching very seriously and encourages staff to engage with the scholarship of learning and teaching. There are excellent opportunities for imaginative curriculum development and course design and delivery. The day-to-day administration of teaching is overseen by the Mathematics Teaching Organisation (MTO), and led by the Director of Teaching. The School is involved with the teaching of the equivalent of about 900 full-time undergraduates at any one time.

Postgraduate Teaching: The School currently has close to sixty research students working for PhD or MPhil degrees in all the main areas of mathematics and statistics and offers a one-year MSc by research. It runs also a range of MSc programmes including highly successful programmes in Operational Research and Financial Mathematics, the latter run jointly with Heriot-Watt University.

Related Institutes and Societies

The Maxwell Institute and the Department of Mathematics at Heriot-Watt University: The Maxwell Institute brings together within a single body the research activities of the School of Mathematics and the Department of Mathematics and Department of Actuarial Mathematics & Statistics at Heriot-Watt University. It is part of the Edinburgh Research Partnership in Engineering and Mathematics, recently established by Edinburgh and Heriot-Watt Universities, which consists of five joint research institutes and a joint graduate school.

The International Centre for Mathematical Sciences (ICMS) in Edinburgh is one of the UK's major resources in mathematics. Over the past 20 years the centre has established a superb reputation for hosting efficiently managed workshops at the highest scientific level covering a very broad range of mathematical topics. During its 20 year history, ICMS has attracted many of the best mathematicians in the world to the UK - in 2010 alone 4 Fields medallists attended ICMS workshops - and has consistently promoted the work of scientists from across the UK and encouraged links between academic mathematicians and their colleagues in commerce and industry. ICMS was founded in 1992 by Edinburgh and Heriot-Watt Universities and receives substantial national funding from both EPSRC and the Scottish Funding Council.

Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre/HPC-Europa: The School has links to the Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre (EPCC) which is one of Europe's largest centres for research on advanced and grid computing. EPCC is a member of the HPC-Europa network which offers possibilities for research visits and access to high performance computing facilities for scientific investigation. At EPCC there are principally three parallel computers: (i) a 52-processor SunFire E15K, (ii) a 1472-processor IBM Power 5 system, and (iii) a 1024-node BlueGene/L.

Mathematicians at the Maxwell Institute also benefit from, and have a substantial role in running, the Edinburgh Mathematical Society. The Royal Society of Edinburgh is Scotland's National Academy of Science and Letters and provides further support for researchers based in Scotland.

Salary
The starting salary will be on the Lecturer (UE08) scale, between £37,012 - £44,166 per annum. Exceptionally appointment may be to the Senior Lecturer/Reader (UE09) scale for which the salary scale is £46,846 - £52, 706.

UKBA Certificate of Sponsorship
Should you require a visa to undertake paid employment in the UK you will be required to fulfil the minimum points criteria to be granted a Certificate of Sponsorship and Tier 2 visa. As appropriate, at the time an offer of appointment is made to you, you will be asked to demonstrate that you fulfil the criteria in respect of financial maintenance and competency in English.

Interviews will be held during the period 3rd - 6th December 2012. If you have not heard from us by 31 January 2013 please assume that your application has been unsuccessful.

We welcome informal enquiries about these posts. The relevant contact for such enquiries will vary depending on the research background of the enquirer - for details of who to make informal enquiries to please email hr@maths.ed.ac.uk giving a brief comment on your main research areas.

The School of Mathematics
The University of Edinburgh's School of Mathematics is one of the leading centres for research and teaching in mathematics in Europe. As a partner in the Maxwell Institute for Mathematical Sciences - a centre for research and postgraduate training bringing together the research activities of the School and the Department of Mathematics and Department of Actuarial Mathematics & Statistics at Heriot-Watt University - we are one of the largest mathematical groupings in the UK. Edinburgh is also home to the International Centre for Mathematical Sciences, a UK centre for international workshops and meetings in mathematics. Further information about the School, our research and our teaching is available at http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk.

The School covers a very broad range of research topics in pure mathematics, applied mathematics, operational research and statistics. It has nearly fifty permanent members of academic staff and around ten research fellows and research associates. There are approximately sixty graduate research students and over one hundred and fifty MSc students. The academic staff of the School have significant collaborations with researchers throughout the world, and the School is committed to encouraging research at the highest possible level.

The School was judged "Excellent" in the last Teaching Quality Assessment and was rated 5* (Pure), 5 (Applied) and 4 (Statistics and Operational Research) in the 2001 Research Assessment Exercise. It is committed to maintaining and improving the quality of its teaching provision, including the related administrative procedures. Within the school there are a wide range of research areas and many seminars and colloquia are run throughout the academic year.

The School is located in the James Clerk Maxwell Building (JCMB) which is situated on the King's Buildings site, approximately 3 kilometres south of the centre of the city of Edinburgh. The JCMB also houses parts of School of Physics, BioSS, the University's Information Services (IS) and Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre (EPCC); a leading European supercomputing facility. The Schools of Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Engineering and Electronics, and parts of GeoSciences are within a few minutes' walk.

http://www.maths.ed.ac.uk
 
College of Science and Engineering (http://www.ed.ac.uk/science-engineering)
The College of Science and Engineering (CSE) is one of the largest and highest-ranked science and engineering groupings in the UK. Headed by Professor Lesley Yellowlees, CSE comprises seven Schools (Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Engineering, GeoSciences, Informatics, Mathematics, and Physics and Astronomy). Informatics is located in the University’s Central Area near George Square, with the other six 2 miles further south at the King’s Buildings. The College has over 2,700 academic and support staff, and educates some 6,000 undergraduates, 800 taught postgraduates and 1,500 research students. It is in the front rank of UK university science and engineering groupings for research quality and income (£130M in 2001/12), and is a key player in many European and international research collaborations.

Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) 2008
In the 2008 RAE over 600 research active staff were returned. 96% of the College submission was of international quality in its originality, significance and rigour with 66% of the submission being rated internationally excellent.
 
The University of Edinburgh
For more than four centuries, our people and their achievements have rewritten history time and again. They’ve explored space, revolutionised surgery, published era-defining books, paved the way for life-saving medical breakthroughs and introduced to the world many inventions, discoveries and ideas from penicillin to Dolly the sheep. We have believed that anything is possible.

We still do. The latest Research Assessment Exercise highlighted our place at the forefront of international research. This adds to our international reputation for the quality of our teaching and our student experience excellence.

As a member of staff you will be part of one of the world's leading universities, with 22 Schools spread over 3 Colleges that offer more than 500 undergraduate and 160 postgraduate courses to over 30,000 students each year. Professional services are critical to this success as well as our world-class teaching, research and student facilities. In fact, we are one of the top employers in Edinburgh, with over 11,700 people spread across a wide range of academic and supporting roles.

As a world-changing, world-leading university we are an exciting, positive, creative, challenging and rewarding place to work. We give you support, nurture your talent, develop and reward success and integrate academic, professional and personal career goals, as well as give your career the benefit of a great and distinguished reputation. 
