from	Joceline Lega <physd@math.arizona.edu>
to	siminos@gatech.edu
cc	njb@math.ubc.ca,
physd@math.arizona.edu,
obuhler@cims.nyu.edu
date	Tue, May 4, 2010 at 8:11 AM
subject	Your Submission PHYSD-D-10-00070
	
hide details 8:11 AM (1 hour ago)
	
Manuscript Number:  PHYSD-D-10-00070
Article Title: Continuous symmetry reduction and return maps for higher-dimensional flows
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena

Dear Dr. Siminos,
below you will find two referee reports on your article "Continuous symmetry reduction and return maps for higher-dimensional flows".
Referee 1 rates the manuscript very highly and recommends immediate acceptance. Referee 2, on the other hand, suggests that major revisions are needed before publication. Reading over the latter's report, the main criticism appears to be leveled at the amount of new material contained in the manuscript in comparison to the amount of review material. However, in view of the special nature of the current volume, I am inclined to be lenient in this regard, and therefore I am prepared to accept the article subject to you making minor revisions based on the critique of referee 2 (and the minor comment of referee 1). Once you have prepared a new version of the manuscript, please submit the
revision together with a list of your changes and/or rebuttals.
Best wishes,
Neil Balmforth


Reviewer #1: This is an interesting paper. So much so that I have not wanted to part with my review, and I apologize to the authors for taking so long. The paper motivated me enough to follow up on several of the references cited.

The paper is well-written and has a strong pedagogical component - several ideas are explained quite well.  The discussion on symmetry is concise and understandable, with the Lorenz flow serving as a illustrative (blissful)  example.

I also enjoyed the the historical notes. Such discussions can be dangerous - I have found inaccurate historical citations in Cushman and Bates, for example.  But, I have no beefs with the citations of this paper.

The meat of the paper is a comparison using the Lorenz model between  reduction based on invariant polynomials versus that of Cartan's moving frames. I had studied Hilbert's theorem from a purely algebraic perspective, and it was very gratifying to see it used in the context of this paper.

In several places it is mentioned that results apply to compact groups. However, the semidirect product Galilean group which is physically relevant is not compact. The author's might comment a bit further about this.


Reviewer #2: Report on

Manuscript Number PHYSD-D-10-00070

CONTINUOUS SYMMETRY REDUCTION AND RETURN MAPS FOR HIGHER-DIMENSIONAL FLOWS

by E. Siminos and P. Cvitanovic

The authors give a brief introduction to the theory of continuous symmetries
in dynamical systems, and present two well-established methods for reducing
dissipative flows with continuous symmetries to simpler systems.  First,
they discuss the use of Hilbert bases (which can also be useful for discrete
symmetries) and argue that this method is unsuitable for high-dimensional
flows such as those produced by truncations of parabolic PDEs.  Then the
authors describe the method of moving frames and the related method of
slices, which seem more promising for use with high-dimensional flows.
Both methods are applied to the complex Lorenz equations (CLE), a five-
dimensional ODE with a one-dimensional group of symmetries SO(2).

The manuscript gives a nice and reasonably self-contained review of the
two methods, and probably gives a gentle introduction to the ideas used
in the more substantial forthcoming work [73] where the advantages of the
moving frames method would likely be made more apparent.  Several "historical
notes" in the manuscript give useful and interesting information on the
historical development of the theory and applications.

Most of the manuscript is devoted to a review of symmetry and the two methods,
and only some six of 26 pages of text is devoted to applications of the
two methods to the CLE.  As far as I know, the results for the CLE are new,
but more recent works on the CLE should be cited, particularly those that
make use of the symmetry (for example: Vladimirov et al., Int. J. Bif. Chaos
8 (1998) 723-729).

One of the main points the authors make is the superiority of the method of
moving frames when applied to high-dimensional systems of ODEs, but the low
dimensionality of the CLE, as well as the simple nature of the symmetry,
do not make the advantages of the moving frame method apparent.  For the
CLE, both methods give essentially the same information for a comparable
amount of work.  If a simple comparison of the two methods is intended,
an even simpler system could be used for the purposes of illustration, such
as a system in the plane equivariant with respect to the usual action
of SO(2).  On the other hand, to boost the novel content of the manuscript,
and also to strengthen the case for the moving frame method, some results
from [73] could be included together with some relevant discussion.
For example, one needs to be lucky or clever in the choice of Poincare
section, or of a slice fixing point, and reading the manuscript one is left
curious how these vital choices are to be made in a large-dimensional system.

Some minor points:  the notation  g(t) on p.7 needs to be explained since
it is not the same use as equation (4); in the first paragraph of 5.2 there
are some inconsistencies in the use of the word "section"; there are some
missing dates and page numbers, or incorrect dates in the references
(for example: [31], [19]); reference [28] is not a monograph.

