Dear Prof. Dr. Guhr,

I am writing to apply for a post-doctoral position in your group, in response to the advertisement in your website. I received my PhD in Physics from the Georgia Institute of Technology in 2009, working on non-linear dynamics under the supervision of Prof. Cvitanovic. I am currently working as a postdoc on nonlinear problems in the kinetic theory of plasmas at the French atomic energy commission (CEA) in the Paris region and I find many-body quantum mechanics to be a very interesting next step for me, as I will explain below.

My PhD thesis work focused on the interplay of symmetry and nonlinear dynamics in spatially extended systems. The main goal of the research effort is a geometric understanding of dissipative, turbulent flows with coherent structures as dynamical systems in a high-dimensional state space. This would in turn naturally lead to the quantitative prediction of statistical averages with tools such as trace formulas which relate the spectrum of transfer operators to the spectrum of periodic orbits. However, when dynamics admits a continuous symmetry, the geometric picture is often obscured by the presence of equivalence classes of solutions. In this context, I worked on the problem of symmetry reduction for compact Lie groups acting in high-dimensional spaces. One of the main results is an explicit invariant basis for symmetry reduction in the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky partial differential equation, which allowed an elucidation of the role the unstable manifolds of certain traveling wave solutions play in organizing the global geometry. 

As a postdoc, I moved to the study of plasma kinetic theory and specifically of the Vlasov-Poisson system (collisionless Boltzmann equation coupled to an electric field in a plasma) in relation to collective phenomena in laser-plasma interaction problems. My interest here is in transferring tools from dissipative systems (such as Galerkin projection onto a finite dimensional dynamical system) to the study of spatially extended systems endorsed with a Hamiltonian structure. As a first step I've studied the stability of nonlinear plasma waves, a problem which is also of great practical interest to current inertial confinement fusion efforts and for which no well established and universal method was available. In the process of developing a semi-analytic method allowing to project the problem to a finite-dimensional basis, certain convergence issues arose, owing to the Hamiltonian, time-reversible character of the underlying linear operator. These were resolved using operator-theoretic techniques (spectral deformation) and led to a fast converging and general scheme for the computation of stability of nonlinear waves of the Vlasov-Poisson system. We are currently working towards applying our method to the problem of nonlinear saturation of stimulated Raman scattering, a process detrimental to inertial confinement fusion.

The latter work on kinetic theory turned my attention to many-body systems and especially to collective behavior. At the same time, although a substantial part of my graduate training at Georgia Tech which involved quantum mechanics (ranging from standard graduate level courses to many body quantum field theory), I have not capitalized on it in terms of research, even though I always found it interesting. Moreover, my PhD adviser's research plan is to eventually attack QCD through the tools of dynamical systems so that even classical problems were considered through the perspective of an impending generalization in quantum field theory. Thus, I always felt that I could (and should) widen my scope beyond classical physics. I did therefore decide to look for a postdoc in the interface of statistical physics and quantum chaos, and this is how I found out about your research. I think that the postdoc position in quantum chaos and many-body systems perfectly corresponds to what I would like to work on right now.

Concerning practical matters, my contract at CEA ends in the beginning of July 2011. You will receive recommendation letters by email from: 

Prof. Predrag Cvitanovic (Georgia Tech), 
Dr. Didier Benisti (CEA), 
Prof. Ruslan Davidchack (University of Leicester). 

I attach my curriculum vitae, a list of publications and recent conferences, copies of my three most relevant publications and of my MS and PhD degree certificate from Georgia Tech. I have no copy of my BS degree from the University of Thessaloniki (Greece) at my disposal at this moment, but I have asked for a translated copy that should be available within one or two weeks (I did not want to hold back the application for this, in fear of the position being filled). Please let me know whether there is any further information I could provide.

Thank you very much for your consideration. 

Sincerely,
